Unit 4001: Engineering Design
Unit Code: T/650/9628
Level: 4
Credits: 15
Introduction
The tremendous possibilities of the techniques and processes developed by engineers
can only be realised by great design. Design turns an idea into a useful artefact, the
problem into a solution, or something ugly and inefficient into an elegant, desirable,
and cost-effective everyday object. Without a sound understanding of the design
process, the engineer works in isolation without the links between theory and the
needs of the end user.
The aim of this unit is to introduce students to the methodical steps that engineers
use in creating functional products and processes as an individual or part of a design
team; from a design brief to the work, and the stages involved in identifying and
justifying a solution to a given engineering need.
Among the topics included in this unit are: Gantt charts and critical path analysis,
stakeholder requirements, market analysis, design process management, technical
drawing, modelling and prototyping, manufacturability, sustainability and
environmental impact, reliability, safety and risk analyses, and ergonomics.
On successful completion of this unit, students will be able to prepare an engineering
design specification that satisfies stakeholders’ requirements, implement best
practices when analysing and evaluating possible design solutions, prepare a written
technical design report, and present their finalised design to a customer or audience.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
8
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Create a design specification for a given design brief that meets stakeholder’s
requirements, along with a proposed design solution
LO2 Analyse possible technical solutions to implement the proposed design
specification
LO3 Produce a design report considering all key aspects including manufacturability
(or design for manufacturing and assembly) and environmental impact
LO4 Present the design solution to an audience, including evaluation of feedback
and future improvements.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
9
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Create a design specification for a given design brief that meets
stakeholder’s requirements, along with a proposed design solution
Planning techniques used to prepare a design specification:
Definition of client’s/users’ objectives, needs, and constraints
Definition of design constraints, function, specification (e.g., including
sub-systems and integrated systems), and milestones
Planning the design task: Flow charts, Gantt charts, Design decision matrix,
network, and critical path analysis necessary in the design process
Use of relevant technical/engineering/industry standards within the design
process (e.g., BS8888).
Design process:
Process development, steps to consider from start to finish
The cycle from design to manufacture
Three- and five-stage design processes
Common tools and techniques used (e.g., Six Sigma, 8 wastes, etc.)
Use of data, relevant tools (e.g., design tools/software, data reporting tools)
Vocabulary used in engineering design.
Stage of the design process which includes:
Analysing the situation, providing problem statement, researching the problem,
defining tasks and outputs, creating the design concept, and writing a
specification
Suggest possible solutions, select a preferred solution, prepare working
drawings, describe relevant manufacturing aspects/processes (e.g., serialised
manufacturing, field level operations, and support), construct a prototype,
test and evaluate the design against objectives, design communication
(write a report).
Environmental considerations:
Design for recycling, net zero/Low carbon, design for service and repair,
social equity and innovation.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
10
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Customer/stakeholder requirements:
Converting customer requests to a list of objectives and constraints
Interpretation of design requirements
Market analysis of existing products and competitors
Aspects of innovation and performance management in decision-making
Stakeholder engagement and communications in the context: Listening,
non-verbal communication, clarity and brevity, friendliness, confidence,
empathy, open-mindedness, respect, feedback, and picking the right medium;
communication with groups including group expectations, dealing with reactions
and disagreements, allowing and encouraging participation, acting on agreed
outcomes, negative communication, motivating disillusioned colleagues,
persuasion and negotiation.
LO2 Analyse possible technical solutions to implement the proposed design
specification
Conceptual design and evaluating possible solutions:
Modelling, prototyping and simulation using industry standard software, (e.g.,
AutoCAD, Fusion 360, Catia, SolidWorks, Creo) on high specification computers
Sun systems and their integration into the final design
Use of evaluation and analytical tools, e.g., cause and effect diagrams, CAD,
knowledge-based engineering; use relevant data management systems,
databases, data formats, data analytics and workflows
Throughput, reliability, availability and maintainability (T-RAM)
Possible solutions using latest methods e.g. additive manufacturing, hot isostatic
pressing (HIP)
Use of related documentation: job cards/build records, 2D & 3D drawing/models,
Bill of Materials (BOM), Cost Analysis Reports, Compliance Report, Standard
Operating Instructions (SOI’s), Standard Process Instructions (POI’s), Engineering
Query Notifications (EQN’s) and Drawing Query Notifications (DQN’s).
LO3 Produce a design report considering all key aspects including
manufacturability (or design for manufacturing and assembly) and
environmental impact
Managing the design process:
Recognising limitations including cost, physical processes, availability of
material/components and skills, timing, scheduling and design factors such as
environmental impact and due considerations.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
11
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Working to specifications and standards, including:
The role of compliance checking, feasibility assessment, and commercial viability
of product design through testing and validation
Analysing and interpreting data/information for documentation such as Parts Per
Million (PPM) quality adherence, cost analysis and test data
Documentation control processes and procedures such as format, location,
access, authorisation.
Design for testing, including:
Material selection to suit selected processes, tools, and technologies
Consideration of manufacturability, reliability, life cycle and environmental
impact (e.g. UN sustainability goals)
The importance of safety, risk management, and ergonomics
Organisation approved Standard Operating Procedures (SOP’s) and
documentation recording systems, risk assessment, and the potential
implications on safety, quality, and delivery if they are not adhered to.
Conceptual design and effective tools:
Technologies and manufacturing processes used in order to transfer engineering
designs into finished products.
Design report:
Sample professional design reports and widely used professional formats,
key sections of the report, referencing formats including citation.
LO4 Present the design solution to an audience, including evaluation of
feedback and future improvements
Communication and post-presentation review:
Selection of communication/presentation tools/methods (e.g. formal and
informal presentations, written reports, verbal, electronic, social media, data
metrics), team presentation and management (e.g., team integration and
dynamics, effective communications, conflict management).
Analysis of presentation feedback:
Strategies for improvement based on feedback, including systematic,
proactive and transparent approach to improve design solutions.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
12
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Create a design specification for a given design brief that
meets stakeholder’s requirements, along with a proposed
design solution
P1 Create a design M1 Evaluate potential planning D1 Compare and contrast
specification from a given techniques, presenting a case the completed design
design brief. for the method chosen. specification against a
formal professional
P2 Explain the influence of M2 Demonstrate critical path
engineering specification.
the stakeholder’s design analysis techniques in design
brief and requirements in project scheduling/planning
the preparation of the and explain their use.
design specification.
P3 Produce a design project
schedule with a graphical
illustration of
the planned activities.
LO2 Analyse possible technical solutions to implement the
proposed design specification
P4 Analyse industry M3 Apply the principles of D2 Evaluate potential
standard evaluation and modelling, simulation and/or technical solutions,
analytical tools used in prototyping, using appropriate presenting a case for the
formulating possible software, to develop an final choice of solution.
technical solutions. appropriate design solution.
P5 Use appropriate design
techniques to produce a
possible design solution.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
13
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Pass Merit Distinction
LO3 Produce a design report considering all key aspects
including manufacturability (or design for manufacturing and
assembly) and environmental impact
P6 Prepare a formal M4 Assess any compliance, D3 Evaluate the
engineering technical safety, and risk management effectiveness of the formal
design report. issues contained within the professional engineering
technical design report. technical design report
P7 Explain the role of
for producing a fully
design specifications and
compliant finished
standards in the technical
product.
design report including
environmental impact.
LO4 Present the design solution to an audience, including
evaluation of feedback and future improvements
P8 Present the
M5 Reflect on the effectiveness D4 Justify potential
recommended design
of the chosen communication improvements to the
solution to the identified
strategy in presenting the design solution and/or
audience. design solution. presentation based on
reflection and/or
P9 Explain possible
feedback.
communication strategies
and presentation methods
that could be used to
inform the stakeholders
of the recommended
solution.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
14
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Barberio M., Colella M., Figliola A. and Battisti A. (Editors) (2023) Architecture and Design
for Industry 4.0: Theory and Practice − Lecture Notes in Mechanical Engineering
(Hardback). Springer.
Dul J. and Weerdmeester B. (2008) Ergonomics for beginners . 3rd Ed.
Boca Raton: CRC Press.
Dym C.L., Little P. and Orwin E. (2014) Engineering Design: a Project Based Introduction .
4th Ed. Wiley.
Griffiths B. (2003) Engineering Drawing for Manufacture . Kogan Page Science.
Jack H. (2021) Engineering Design, Planning, and Management . 2nd Ed. Academic Press.
Leake J.M, Goldstein M.H., and Borgerson J.L. (2022) Engineering Design Graphics:
Sketching, Modeling, and Visualization . 3rd Ed. Wiley.
Nassersharif B. (2022) Engineering Capstone Design. 1st Ed. CRC Press.
Planchard D.C. (2023) Engineering Design with SOLIDWORKS 2023: A Step-by-Step Project
Based Approach Utilizing 3D Solid Modelling . 1st Ed. SDC Publications.
Pugh S. (1990) Total Design: Integrated Methods for Successful Product Engineering .
1st Ed. Prentice Hall.
Reddy K.V. (2008) Textbook of Engineering Drawing . 2nd Ed. Hyderabad: BS Publications.
Simmons C. H. (2012) Manual of Engineering Drawing: Technical Product Specification
and Documentation to British and International Standards . 4th Ed.
Butterworth-Heinemann.
Voland G (2014) Engineering by Design . 2nd Ed. Pearson.
Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
ASME Journal of Mechanical Design
Design Science
Journal of Engineering Design
Journal of Engineering Design and Technology
Research in Engineering Design
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
15
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4023: Computer Aided Design and Manufacture (CAD/CAM)
Unit 5001: Research Project.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
16
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025