Unit 4002: Engineering Mathematics
Unit Code: A/651/0708
Level: 4
Credits: 15
Introduction
The mathematics that is delivered in this unit is directly applicable to the engineering
and manufacturing industry, and it will help to increase students’ knowledge of the
broad underlying principles within this discipline.
The aim of this unit is to develop students’ skills in the mathematical principles and
theories that underpin the engineering curriculum. Students will be introduced to
mathematical methods and statistical techniques in order to analyse and solve
problems within an engineering and manufacturing context.
On successful completion of this unit, students will be able to employ mathematical
methods within a variety of contextualised examples, interpret data using statistical
techniques, and use analytical and computational methods to evaluate and solve
engineering and manufacturing sector problems.
Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Apply a variety of mathematical methods to a range of engineering and
manufacturing sector problems
LO2 Investigate applications of statistical and probability techniques to interpret,
organise, and present data
LO3 Use analytical and computational methods for solving engineering and
manufacturing sector problems by relating sinusoidal wave and vector
functions to their respective applications
LO4 Examine how differential and integral calculus can be used to solve engineering
and manufacturing sector problems.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
17
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Apply a variety of mathematical methods to a range of engineering and
manufacturing sector problems
Mathematical concepts:
Dimensional analysis
Arithmetic and geometric progressions
Complex Numbers.
Matrices
Functions:
Exponential, logarithmic, trigonometric, and hyperbolic functions.
Engineering and manufacturing sector examples:
Case studies with vocational scenarios, occupation/sector specific applications,
modern industrial trends, needs and goals (e.g., sustainability, digitalisation).
LO2 Investigate applications of statistical and probability techniques to
interpret, organise, and present data
Summary of data:
Data collection methods
Presentation of data − histograms; bar charts; line diagrams; cumulative
frequency diagrams; scatter plots
Grouped and ungrouped data
Mean, mode, median, and standard deviation of data
Pearson’s and Spearman’s correlation coefficient
Linear regression, Classification methods, linear correlation coefficient and
product moment correlation
Coordinate systems and reference frames
Effective data communication and representation methods/formats for
stakeholder groups; accessible, inclusive, and diversity considerations and
implications.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
18
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Hypothesis Testing:
Null hypothesis
Alternate hypothesis
Probability theory:
Conditional and unconditional probability
Binomial, Poisson, and normal distribution
Confidence intervals
Estimation of reliability and quality of engineering components and systems.
LO3 Use analytical and computational methods for solving engineering and
manufacturing sector problems by relating sinusoidal wave and vector
functions to their respective applications
Sinusoidal waves:
Sine waves and their applications
Trigonometric and hyperbolic identities.
Vector functions:
Vector notation and properties
Representing engineering quantities in vector form
Vectors in three dimensions.
Mathematical software for engineering and manufacturing sector:
Use of mathematical software packages (e.g. Mathcad, Microsoft Excel)
Confirmation of analytical results.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
19
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO4 Examine how differential and integral calculus can be used to solve
engineering and manufacturing sector problems
Differential calculus:
Definitions and concepts
Definition of a function and a derivative, graphical representation of a function,
notation of derivatives, limits and continuity, derivatives; rates of change,
increasing and decreasing functions and turning points
Differentiation of functions
Differentiation of functions including:
• standard functions/results
• using the chain, product, and quotient rules
• second order and higher derivatives
Types of function: polynomial, logarithmic, exponential, and trigonometric
(sine, cosine, and tangent), inverse trigonometric and hyperbolic functions.
Integral calculus:
Definite and indefinite integration
Integrating to determine the area
Integration of functions including:
• common/standard functions
• using substitution
• by parts
Exponential growth and decay
Types of function: algebraic including partial fractions and trigonometric
(sine, cosine, and tangent) functions
Engineering and manufacturing sector problems involving calculus:
Including: stress and strain, torsion, tolerancing, torque settings, motion,
dynamic systems, oscillating systems, force systems, heat energy and
thermodynamic systems, fluid flow, AC theory, electrical signals, information
systems, transmission systems, electrical machines, electronics
Efficient problem-solving competencies in the chosen occupation/sector and
effective written/verbal communication of solutions.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
20
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Apply a variety of mathematical methods to a range of
engineering and manufacturing sector problems LO1 and LO2
P1 Apply dimensional analysis M1 Use three D1 Present data as
techniques to solve complex mathematical concepts meaningful information
engineering/manufacturing to solve engineering/ using appropriate
problems. manufacturing problems, methods that can be
justifying your chosen understood by a non-
P2 Generate answers from
methods. technical audience.
engineering arithmetic and
geometric progressions.
P3 Determine solutions of
engineering equations using
exponential, logarithmic,
trigonometric, and hyperbolic
functions.
LO2 Investigate applications of statistical and probability
techniques to interpret, organise, and present data
P4 Investigate engineering data M2 Conduct an engineering
by calculating mean, mode, hypothesis test and
median, and standard deviation. interpret the results .
P5 Calculate probabilities within
Poisson, binomially and normally
distributed engineering random
variables.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
21
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Pass Merit Distinction
LO3 Use analytical and computational methods for solving
engineering and manufacturing sector problems by relating
sinusoidal wave and vector functions to their respective
applications
P6 Solve engineering/ M3 Use compound angle D2 Apply engineering
manufacturing problems relating identities to combine mathematical software
to sinusoidal functions. individual sine waves into a to confirm the analytical
single wave, and illustrate solutions for at least
P7 Use appropriate methodology
graphically. three engineering/
to determine engineering
manufacturing problems
parameters of data represented
involving sinusoidal and
in vector form.
vector functions.
LO4 Examine how differential and integral calculus can be used
to solve engineering and manufacturing sector problems
P8 Examine rates of change for a M4 Solve a range of D3 Evaluate a range
range of mathematical functions. complex engineering/ of engineering/
manufacturing problems manufacturing problems
P9 Use integral calculus to
using both differential and that involve second-
determine a range of
integral calculus. order derivatives and
mathematical functions.
the concept of maxima
and minima.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
22
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Bird J. (2021) Higher Engineering Mathematics . 9th Ed. Routledge.
Bird J. (2019) Science and Mathematics for Engineering . 6th Ed. Routledge.
Glyn J. and Dyke P. (2020) Modern Engineering Mathematics. 6th edition. Pearson.
Made Easy Editorial Board (2022) Engineering Mathematics for GATE 2023 and ESE 2023
(Prelims) – Theory and Previous Year Solved Papers . India: Made Easy Publications
Pvt Ltd.
Rattan K.S., Klingbeil N.W., and Baudendistel C.M. (2021) Introductory Mathematics for
Engineering Applications . 2nd Ed. Wiley.
Ram M. (2021) Recent Advances in Mathematics for Engineering. CRC Press.
Teodorescu P., Stanescu N., and Pandrea N. (2013) Numerical Analysis with Applications
in Mechanics and Engineering. Wiley-IEEE Press.
Ram M. (2020) Mathematics in Engineering Sciences: Novel Theories, Technologies,
and Applications. 1st Edition. CRC Press.
Sobot, R. (2022) Engineering Mathematics by Example . 1st Ed. Springer.
Stroud, K.A. and Booth, D.J. (2020) Engineering Mathematics . 8th Ed. Bloomsbury
Publishing
Urbano M. (2019) Introductory Electrical Engineering with Math Explained in Accessible
Language . Wiley.
Vick B. (2020) Applied Engineering Mathematics. CRC Press.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
23
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
Annals of Mathematics
Computational Geometry
Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics
International Journal of Engineering Mathematics
Journal of Computational and Engineering Mathematics
Journal of Engineering Mathematics
Journal of Geometry and Physics
Journal of Mathematical Physics
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 5006: Further Engineering Mathematics
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
24
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025