Unit 4003: Engineering Science I
Unit Code: J/651/0710
Level: 4
Credits: 15
Introduction
Engineering is a discipline that uses scientific theory to design, develop, or maintain
structures, machines, systems, and processes. Engineers are therefore required to
have a broad knowledge of the science that is applicable to the industry around them.
This unit introduces students to the fundamental laws and applications of the physical
sciences within engineering and how to apply this knowledge to find solutions to a
variety of engineering problems.
Among the topics included in this unit are: international system of units, interpreting
data, static and dynamic fundamentals, fluid mechanics and thermodynamics,
material properties and failure, A.C./D.C. circuit theories, and electromagnetic
principles and properties.
On successful completion of this unit, students will be able to interpret and present
qualitative and quantitative data using computer software, calculate unknown
parameters within mechanical and electrical systems, explain a variety of material
properties, and use electromagnetic theory in an applied context.
Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Examine scientific data using both quantitative and qualitative methods
LO2 Apply the fundamentals of mechanical engineering systems
LO3 Explore the characteristics and properties of engineering materials
LO4 Analyse applications of A.C./D.C. circuit theorems, electromagnetic principles,
and properties.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
25
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Examine scientific data using both quantitative and qualitative methods
Quantitative research methodologies and methods:
Descriptive Research
Survey Research
Correlational Research
Quasi-experimental Research Design
Experimental Research
Relevant methodologies and methods.
Qualitative research methodologies and methods:
Grounded theory
Ethnographic
Narrative research
Historical
Case studies
Phenomenology
Relevant methodologies and methods.
The scientific method:
Question
Research
Hypothesis
Experiment
Data Analysis
Conclusion and Communication.
Interpreting data:
Investigation using the scientific method to gather appropriate data
Test procedures for physical (destructive and non-destructive) tests and
statistical tests that might be used in gathering information
Summarising quantitative and qualitative data with appropriate graphical
representations and appropriate use of an international system of units
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
26
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Exploring the usage of quantitative and qualitative data in engineering
applications specific to occupation/sector (e.g., manufacturing, operations,
space systems, aeronautical engineering, etc.)
Using software to analyse data
Using presentation software to present data to an audience.
LO2 Apply the fundamentals of mechanical engineering systems
Static and dynamic fundamentals:
Units, scalars and vectors, two-dimensional force systems, and moment (torque)
and couple
Representing loaded components with space and free-body diagrams
Equilibrium in two dimensions, distributed forces, the centre of mass,
and centroids
Calculating support reactions of beams subjected to concentrated and
distributed loads
Newton’s laws of motion, one-dimensional particle kinematics, one-dimensional
particle kinetics, D’Alembert’s principle, and the principle of conservation of
energy
Application of fundamentals and industrial case studies.
Fluid mechanics and thermodynamics:
Fluid definition and properties
Definition of pressure, hydrostatic pressure, and basic equations, manometry,
application and calculations, Archimedes’ principle
Flow characteristics and definitions, introduction to ideal fluid flow
Continuity of volume and mass flow for an incompressible fluid
Bernoulli’s equation
Thermodynamic properties, temperature, the zeroth law of thermodynamic
and pressure, system and control volume, processes, and cycles
Energy and energy transfer, and heat and work transfer: definitions, units,
and sign convention
Ideal gas and equation of state, internal energy, enthalpy, and specific heats
of ideal gas
The first law of thermodynamics.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
27
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO3 Explore the characteristics and properties of engineering materials
Engineering materials:
Material properties, classifications, and testing
Atomic structure of materials and the structure of metals, polymers,
and composites
Phase diagrams and analysis
Mechanical and electromagnetic properties of materials.
Material failure:
Destructive and non-destructive testing of materials
The effects of static, dynamic, and impact loading on a material
Degradation of materials and hysteresis.
Material selection:
Desired application
Working conditions
Manufacturability and assembly considerations
Cost and availability
Environmental impact and sustainability
Chemical and Physical properties.
LO4 Analyse applications of A.C./D.C. circuit theorems, electromagnetic
principles, and properties
D.C. circuit theory:
Ohm law, Kirchhoff’s voltage and current laws
Voltage, current, resistance, power, and energy in D.C. networks composed of
resistors, capacitors, and inductors.
Exploring circuit theorems (Thevenin, Norton, Mesh, Superposition, Maximum
power transfer).
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
28
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



A.C. circuit theory:
Waveform characteristics in a single-phase A.C. circuit
Odd and even harmonics
VmaxSin ω t ± α )
AC circuit analysis using Kirchhoff’s laws
RLC circuits; Impedance, reactance, admittance, phasors, Q factor, bandwidth,
and resonance in RLC circuits.
Magnetism:
Characteristics of magnetic fields and electromagnetic force
The principles and applications of electromagnetic induction, self and mutual
induction, solenoid, relay, transformer, motors, and generators
Single and three-phase power, AC and DC motor and control.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
29
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Examine scientific data using both quantitative and
qualitative methods
P1 Examine at least three M1 Apply the scientific D1 Analyse scientific data
quantitative research method within an employing both quantitative
methods. engineering context that and qualitative methods,
requires both quantitative and using appropriate
P2 Examine at least three
and qualitative research software and justified
qualitative research
methods. graphical representations.
methods.
LO2 Apply the fundamentals of mechanical engineering
systems
P3 Determine the support M2 Determine unknown D2 Analyse thermodynamic
reactions of a beam carrying forces by applying systems with ideal gas by
a combination of a d’Alembert’s principle using the first law of
concentrated load and a to a free-body diagram. thermodynamics.
uniformly distributed load.
P4 Apply Archimedes and
Bernoulli’s principles in
contextual engineering
applications.
P5 Determine the ideal gas
properties during a process.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
30
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Pass Merit Distinction
LO3 Explore the characteristics and properties of engineering
materials
P6 Explore the structural M3 Review elastic and D3 Analyse metals and
properties of metals and electromagnetic hysteresis non-metals for a given
non-metals with reference in different materials. engineering application and
to their material properties. fully justify the materials
chosen.
P7 Explain the types of
degradation found in metals
and non-metals.
LO4 Analyse applications of A.C./D.C. circuit theorems,
electromagnetic principles, and properties
P8 Calculate currents, D4 Evaluate different circuit
M4 Explain the principles
voltages, and power in D.C. theorems used to solve DC
and applications of
circuits with more than one and AC circuit theory
electromagnetic induction
power source. in at least three electrical problems.
devices and machines.
P9 Use software to produce
complex waveforms
combining two or more
sinusoidal waveforms.
P10 Analyse problems on
series and parallel RLC
circuits with A.C. theory
in creating solutions.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
31
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Ashby M.F., Shercliff H., and Cebon D. (2023) Introduction to Materials Science and
Engineering: A Design-Led Approach. 1st Ed. Butterworth-Heinemann.
Ashby M. F. and David R. H. J. (2012) Engineering materials 1: an introduction to
th
properties, applications, and design . 4 Ed. Elsevier.
Bird J. (2012) Science for Engineering . 4th Ed. London: Routledge.
Bolton W. (2006) Engineering Science . 5th Ed. London: Routledge.
Callister Jr. W.D. and RETHWISCH D.G. (2019 ) Callister’s Materials Science and
Engineering . 10th Ed. Global Edition. Wiley.
Cengel Y. (2019) Thermodynamics: an engineering approach SI , 9th Ed. McGraw Hill.
Cengel Y. (2017) Fluid Mechanics: Fundamentals and Applications . 4th Ed. McGraw Hill.
th
Hayt W. H. (2023) Engineering Circuit Analysis ISE. 10 Ed. McGraw Hill.
th
Hibbeler R. C. (2017) Engineering mechanics: Statics. 14 Ed. Pearson.
th
Hibbeler R. C. (2016) Engineering mechanics: dynamics. 14 Ed. Pearson.
Schobeiri M. T. (2010). Fluid mechanics for engineers: a graduate textbook .
Springer Science & Business Media.
Tooley M. and Dingle L. (2012) Engineering Science: For Foundation
Degree and Higher National . London: Routledge.
Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
Applications in Engineering Science
Engineering Reports
International Journal of Engineering Science
International Journal of Engineering Technology and Scientific Innovation
International Journal of Mechanical Sciences
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
32
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4009: Materials, Properties and Testing
Unit 4002: Engineering Design
Unit 4092: Engineering Science II
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
33
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025