Unit 4004: Managing a Professional
Engineering Project
Unit Code: L/651/0712
Level: 4
Credits: 15
Introduction
The responsibilities of the engineer go far beyond completing the task in hand.
Reflecting on their role in a wider ethical, environmental, and sustainability context
starts the process of becoming a professional engineer – a vital requirement for
career progression.
Engineers seldom work in isolation and most tasks they undertake require a range
of expertise, designing, developing, manufacturing, constructing, operating, and
maintaining the physical infrastructure and content of our world. The bringing
together of these skills, expertise, and experience is often managed through the
creation of a project.
This unit introduces students to the techniques and best practices required to
successfully create and manage an engineering/manufacturing project designed to
identify a solution to an engineering need. While carrying out this project students will
consider the role and function of engineering in our society, the professional duties
and responsibilities expected of engineers together with the behaviours that
accompany their actions.
Among the topics covered in this unit are: roles, responsibilities, and behaviours of
a professional engineer, planning a project, project management stages, devising
solutions, theories and calculations, management using a Gantt chart, evaluation
techniques, communication skills, and the creation and presentation of a project
report.
On successful completion of this unit, students will be able to conceive, plan, develop,
and execute a successful engineering project, and produce and present a project
report outlining and reflecting on the outcomes of each of the project processes and
stages. As a result, they will develop skills such as critical thinking, analysis, reasoning,
interpretation, decision-making, information literacy, and information and
communication technology, and skills in professional and confident self-presentation.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
34
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



This unit is assessed by a Pearson-set theme. The project brief will be set by the
centre, based on a theme provided by Pearson (this will change annually). The theme
and chosen project within the theme will enable students to explore and examine a
relevant and current topical aspect of professional engineering.
*Please refer to the accompanying Pearson-set Assignment Guide and the
Theme Release document for further support and guidance on the delivery of
the Pearson-set unit.
Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Select a project that will provide a solution to an identified
engineering/manufacturing problem.
LO2 Conduct planned project activities to generate outcomes which provide a
solution to the identified engineering/manufacturing problem.
LO3 Produce a project report analysing the outcomes of each of the project
processes and stages.
LO4 Present the project report drawing conclusions on the outcomes of the project.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
35
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Select a project that will provide a solution to an identified
engineering/manufacturing problem
Engineering projects:
Overview of project management
Examples of realistic engineering/manufacturing-based problems
Grand engineering/manufacturing challenges (e.g., regional, global, sector,
society); relevant case studies
Crucial considerations for the project
How to identify the nature of the problem through vigorous research
Feasibility study to identify constraints and produce an outline specification
Project management techniques − Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities,
Threats (SWOT), stakeholder matrices, risk mapping, radar chart, and summary
risk profiles.
Team-driven problem solving: positive, professional, respectful, trusting and
ethical working relationships. Impact of human factors (i.e., organisational,
environment and job factors) on individual/team behaviours and performance.
Team support (e.g., coaching/mentoring, feedback, opportunities).
Organisational vision and goals. Holistic stakeholder engagement.
Develop an outline project brief and design specification:
Knowledge theories, calculations and other relevant information that can
support the development of a potential solution
Project selection relevant to occupation/sector of interest/programme of study
(e.g., mechanical, electrical, manufacturing, aeronautical, operations, space,
marine, Industry 4.0, automation, computer systems etc.).
Ethical frameworks:
The Engineering Council and Royal Academy of Engineering’s Statement of
Ethical Principles
The National Society for Professional Engineers’ Code of Ethics.
Professional, Statutory and Regulatory Bodies (PSRBs):
Global, national, and regional influences on engineering/manufacturing, and the
role of the engineer. For example: The Royal Academy of Engineering and the
UK Engineering Council.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
36
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



The role and responsibilities of the PSRBs. For example, UK Engineering Council
and the Professional Engineering Institutions (PEIs)
Roles: Chartered Engineer, Incorporated Engineer, and Engineering Technician,
other professional body membership roles, requirements for eligibility and
responsibilities
Standards and content of the standards. For example, the content of the
UK Standard for Professional Engineering Competence (UKSPEC)
Occupational standards and alignment with knowledge, skills, and behaviours
of a chosen occupation.
International regulatory regimes and agreements associated with professional
engineering:
European Federation of International Engineering Institutions.
European Engineer (Eur Eng)
European Network for Accreditation of Engineering Education
European Society for Engineering Education
International Council on Systems Engineering
The Institute of Industrial and Systems Engineers (IISE)
Washington Accord
Dublin Accord
Sydney Accord
International Engineers Alliance
Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) Engineers Agreement.
LO2 Conduct planned project activities to generate outcomes which provide a
solution to the identified engineering/manufacturing problem
Project execution phase:
Continually monitoring development against the agreed project plan and
adapting the project plan where appropriate
Work plan and time management, using Gantt chart or similar. Prioritisation
of workload/time management techniques to achieve personal and team
objectives. Role of KPIs.
Integrated quality control checks (including risk assessments and resolutions)
Tracking costs and timescales
Maintaining a project diary to monitor progress against milestones and
timescales.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
37
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Engineering professional behaviour sources:
Professional responsibility for health and safety (e.g., UK-SPEC)
Professional standards of behaviour (e.g., UK-SPEC)
Relevant government and organisational policies, legal requirements
(e.g., employment law, equality law), implications, and compliance.
Ethical frameworks:
The Engineering Council and Royal Academy of Engineering’s Statement of
Ethical Principles
The National Society for Professional Engineers’ Code of Ethics.
LO3 Produce a project report analysing the outcomes of each of the project
processes and stages
Convincing arguments:
All findings/outcomes should be convincing and presented logically where the
assumption is that the audience has little or no knowledge of the project
process.
Critical analysis and evaluation techniques:
Most appropriate evaluation techniques to achieve a potential solution
Use of data collection systems, data formats, and dashboards Secondary and
primary data should be critiqued and considered with an objective mindset
Objectivity results in more robust evaluations where an analysis justifies a
judgement and decision making.
LO4 Present the project report drawing conclusions on the outcomes of the
project
Presentation considerations:
Media selection, what to include in the presentation and what outcomes to
expect from it. Audience expectations and contributions
Presentation specifics. Audience: project supervisors, fellow students and
employers and others involved. Time allocation, structure of presentation
Reflection on project outcomes and audience reactions
Conclusion to report, recommendations for future work, lessons learned,
changes to own work patterns.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
38
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Reflection for learning and practice:
The difference between reflecting on performance and evaluating a project −
the former considers the research process, information gathering and data
collection, the latter the quality of the research argument and use of evidence.
The cycle of reflection:
To include reflection in action and reflection on action
How to use reflection to inform future behaviour, particularly directed towards
sustainable performance
The importance of Continuing Professional Development (CPD) in refining
ongoing professional practice. Reflecting on competencies gained. Keeping
abreast of developments in engineering/manufacturing processes
manufacturing and emerging technologies through reskilling/upskilling
(e.g., digital competencies, sustainability goals).
Reflective writing:
Avoiding generalisation and focusing on personal development and the research
journey critically and objectively.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
39
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Select a project that will provide a solution to an identified
engineering/manufacturing problem
P1 Select an appropriate M1 Undertake a feasibility D1 Illustrate the effect
engineering/manufacturing- study to justify project of legislation and ethics
based project, giving reasons selection. in developing the
for the selection project plan.
P2 Create a project plan for the
engineering/manufacturing
project.
LO2 Conduct planned project activities to generate outcomes
which provide a solution to the identified
engineering/manufacturing problem
P3 Conduct project activities, M2 Explore alternative D2 Critically evaluate
recording progress against the methods to monitor and the success of the
original project plan. meet project milestones, and project plan, making
justify selection of chosen recommendations for
method(s). improvement.
LO3 Produce a project report analysing the outcomes of each of
the project processes and stages LO3 and LO4
P4 Produce a project report M3 Use appropriate critical D3 Critically analyse the
covering each stage of the analysis and evaluation project outcomes,
project and analysing project techniques to analyse project making
outcomes. findings. recommendations for
further development.
LO4 Present the project report drawing conclusions on the
outcomes of the project
P5 Present the project activities M4 Analyse own behaviours
and outcomes using appropriate and performance during the
media to an audience. project activities and suggest
areas for improvement
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
40
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Aucoin B.M. (2018) From Engineer to Manager: Mastering the Transition. Second Edition
Hardcover – Unabridged. Artech House.
Del Pont J.P. (2012) Process Engineering and Industrial Management. Wiley.
Kerzner H. (2023) Project Management Metrics, KPIs, and Dashboards: A Guide to
Measuring and Monitoring Project Performance . 4th Edition. Wiley.
Kerzner H. (2022) Innovation Project Management: Methods, Case Studies, and Tools for
Managing Innovation Projects . 2nd Edition. Wiley.
Pugh P. S. (1990) Total Design: Integrated Methods for Successful Product Engineering .
Prentice Hall.
Striebig B., Ogundipe A. and Papadakis M. (2015) Engineering Applications in Sustainable
Design and Development . Cengage Learning.
Ulrich K. and Eppinger S. (2011) Product Design and Development . 5th Ed.
McGraw-Hill Higher Education.
Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
Engineering Management
Engineering Management Journal
Frontiers of Engineering Management
IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management
International Journal of Engineering and Technology
Journal of Engineering Design
Journal of Engineering, Design and Technology
Journal of Engineering and Technology Management
Journal of Manufacturing Technology Management
Journal of Management & Organization
Microelectronic Engineering
Probability in the Engineering and Information Sciences
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
41
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Probabilistic Engineering Mechanics
Results in Engineering
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 5001: Research Project
Unit 5002: Professional Engineering Management
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
42
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025