Unit 4006: Mechatronics
Unit Code: Y/651/0716
Level: 4
Credits: 15
Introduction
Auto-focus cameras, car cruise control and automated airport baggage handling
systems are examples of mechatronic systems. Mechatronics is the combination
of mechanical, electrical, and computer/controlled engineering working together
in automated systems and ‘smart’ product design.
Among the topics included in this unit are: consideration of component compatibility,
constraints on size and cost, control devices used, British and/or European standards
relevant to application, sensor types and interfacing, simulation and modelling
software functions, system function and operation, advantages and disadvantages
of software simulation, component data sheets, systems drawings, flowcharts,
wiring and schematic diagrams.
On successful completion of this unit students will be able to learn about the basic
mechatronic system components and functions, designing a simple mechatronic
system specification for a given application, appropriate simulation and modelling
software to examine its operation and function, and solving faults on mechatronic
systems using a range of techniques and methods.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
50
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Explain the design and operational characteristics of a mechatronic system
LO2 Produce a mechatronic system design specification for a given application
LO3 Examine the operation and function of a mechatronics system using simulation
and modelling software
LO4 Demonstrate fault finding skills and fault analysis on a mechatronic system.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
51
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Explain the design and operational characteristics of a mechatronic system
Origins and evolution:
History and early development, evolution
Industrial and consumer examples of mechatronic systems
Extent of mechatronic systems use
Current operational abilities and anticipated improvements.
Systems characteristics:
Design of systems in an integrated way
Design systems to optimise performance
Design systems using emerging technologies, Industry 4.0 and analyse impact
on organisations
Sensor and transducer types used
Consideration of component compatibility
Constraints on size and cost
Control device requirements and examples of applications.
LO2 Produce a mechatronic system design specification for a given application
Systems specifications:
British and/or European standards relevant to application
Electrical system circuit diagrams, operation of the various components
that make up mechatronic system, understanding technical documents
Sensor types and interfacing
Actuator technology availability and selection
Selection and use of appropriate control software/devices.
Consideration of the interaction of system variables
System commissioning parameters.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
52
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO3 Examine the operation and function of a mechatronics system using
simulation and modelling software
Operation and functions:
Simulation and modelling software functions
System function and operation
Modes of operation simulation, loading and surges
Advantages and disadvantage of software simulation.
LO4 Demonstrate fault finding skills and fault analysis on a mechatronic system
Locating and correcting system faults:
Component data sheets, systems drawings, flowcharts, wiring and schematic
diagrams, technical documentation (e.g. manuals), fault reports
Within the context − effective use of data collection systems (e.g. databases),
data management systems, data analytics and dashboards; documentation
control processes and procedures (e.g., format, location, access, authorisation)
Original system correct function and operation
Instrumentation usage and faults: multimeter, flowmeter, temperature
measurement, pressure meter etc. and the measurement data transmission
Inspection and testing using methodical fault location techniques and methods,
use of control software to aid fault location
Identification, evaluation and verification of faults and their causes, rectification,
final system testing and return to service
Safety first culture in using equipment and resolving the faults − health and
safety policies, procedures and regulations, compliance, risk assessment
processes and procedures, risk mitigation.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
53
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Explain the design and operational characteristics of a
mechatronic system
P1 Explain the key M1 Analyse how the D1 Evaluate the
requirements and components operate as part of mechatronic system
components of a given an integrated mechatronic specification and propose
mechatronics system system. an alternative solution.
P2 Explain the types of M2 Analyse the methods
actuators, sensors and of control used by the
transducers used in a given mechatronic system.
mechatronics system.
LO2 Produce a mechatronic system design specification for a
given application
P3 Produce a design M3 Justify the sensor and D2 Evaluate the
specification for a given actuator technologies selected operational capabilities
mechatronic system with reference to available and limitations of the
application including the alternatives. mechatronic system
details of the sensor and design specification
actuator technologies. produced.
LO3 Examine the operation and function of a mechatronics
system using simulation and modelling software
P4 Examine the operation M4 Analyse the operation D3 Evaluate the
and function of a given and function of a simulated/ advantages and
mechatronics system modelled mechatronics disadvantages of the
using industry standard system, with improvements simulation/modelling
simulation/modelling to the system. software used, based
software. on the results obtained,
with recommended
improvements.
LO4 Demonstrate fault finding skills and fault analysis on a
mechatronic system
P5 Explain the safe use of M5 Apply and document the D4 Investigate the causes
fault finding test equipment safe and correct use of fault- of faults in a given
finding equipment and mechatronic system, with
P6 Demonstrate fault finding
techniques/methods on a suggested amendments to
analysis by locating and
given mechatronic system. the design specification to
rectifying faults on a given
improve system reliability.
mechatronic system.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
54
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Alciatore D.G. and Histand M.B. (2019) Introduction to Mechatronics and Measurement
Systems. 5th Ed. McGraw-Hill.
Bolton W. (2018) Mechatronics: Electronic Control Systems in Mechanical and Electrical
Engineering . 7th Ed. Pearson Education Limited.
Hami A.E. and Pougnet P. (2020) Embedded Mechatronic Systems 2: Analysis of Failures,
Modeling, Simulation and Optimization . 2nd Ed. ISTE Press – Elsevier.
Indri M. and Oboe R. (2022) Mechatronics and Robotics: New Trends and Challenges.
1st Ed. CRC Press.
Lyshevski S.E. (2020) Mechatronics and Control of Electromechanical Systems.
1st Ed. CRC Press.
Mahalik N.P. (2010) Mechatronics: Principles, Concepts and Applications .
New Delhi: McGraw-Hill.
Onwubolu G.C. (2005) Mechatronics: Principles and Applications . Oxford: Elsevier.
Ramachandran K.P., Vijayaraghavan G.K. and Balasundaram M.S. (2008)
Mechatronics: Integrated Mechanical Electronic Systems . India: Wiley.
Singh S.B., Ranjan P. and Haghi A.K. (2022) Applied Mechatronics and Mechanics:
System Integration and Design . 1st Ed. Apple Academic Press.
Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics
IET Robotics and Mechatronics Network
International Journal of Advanced Mechatronic Systems
Journal of Mechatronics and Robotics
Journal of Mechatronics Engineering
Mechatronics
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
55
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4015: Automation, Robotics and Programmable Logic Controllers (PLCs)
Unit 5021: Further Control Systems Engineering.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
56
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025