Unit 4008: Mechanical Principles
Unit Code: K/651/0720
Level: 4
Credits: 15
Introduction
Mechanical principles have been crucial for engineers to convert the energy produced
by burning oil and gas into systems to propel, steer and stop our automobiles,
aircraft, and ships, amongst thousands of other applications. The knowledge and
application of these mechanical principles is still the essential underpinning science
of all machines in use today or being developed into the latest technology.
The aim of this unit is to introduce students to the essential mechanical principles
associated with engineering applications.
Topics included in this unit are: behavioural characteristics of static, dynamic and
oscillating engineering systems including shear forces, bending moments, torsion,
linear and angular acceleration, conservation of energy and vibrating systems; and the
movement and transfer of energy by considering parameters of mechanical power
transmission systems.
On successful completion of this unit students will be able to learn about the
underlying principles, requirements, and limitations of mechanical systems.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
65
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Solve problems within static mechanical systems
LO2 Analyse dynamic mechanical systems
LO3 Investigate elements of simple mechanical power transmission systems
LO4 Analyse natural and damped vibrations within translational and rotational
mass-spring systems.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
66
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Solve problems within static mechanical systems
Shafts and beams:
The effect of shear forces on beams
Bending moments and stress due to bending in beams
Selection of appropriate rolled steel sections to satisfy given specifications for
beams and columns
The theory of torsion in solid and hollow circular shafts
Stress and deflection in solid and hollow circular shafts due to torsion
Impact of stresses in different types of materials
Introduction to stresses in pressure vessels
Use of relevant problem-solving tools within the context e.g. root cause analysis
(RCA), process failure modes effects analysis (PFMEA), fishbone, practical
problem solving (PPS), advanced product quality planning (APQP)
Use of relevant software and simulation tools within the context.
LO2 Analyse dynamic mechanical systems
Energy and work:
The principle of conservation of energy and work-energy transfer in systems
Linear and angular velocity and acceleration
Velocity and acceleration diagrams of planar mechanisms
Gyroscopic motion
Examples and applications of dynamic systems and gyroscopic motion.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
67
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO3 Investigate elements of simple mechanical power transmission systems
Simple systems/subsystems:
Parameters of simple and compounded geared systems
Efficiency of lead screws and screw jacks.
Couplings and energy storage:
Universal couplings and conditions for constant-velocity
Importance of energy storage elements and their applications including
electro-mechanical systems
Examples and applications of current mechanical power transmission
systems/subsystems.
LO4 Analyse natural and damped vibrations within translational and rotational
mass-spring systems
Types of motion:
Simple harmonic motion
Natural frequency of vibration in mass-spring systems.
Damped systems:
Frequency of damped vibrations in mass-spring-damper systems
The conditions for an external force to produce resonance
Examples and applications of mechanical vibrations (e.g., modelling of vibration
isolation, vehicle suspensions).
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
68
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Solve problems within static mechanical systems
P1 Solve mechanical systems M1 Determine the material D1 Verify, using simulation
problems that include used for a circular bar using software, analytical
distribution of shear force, experimental data obtained calculations of the
bending moment and stress from a torsion test for the magnitude of shear force
due to bending in simply angle of twist under loading. and bending moments in
supported beams cantilever and encastre
beams for given design
P2 Justify the selection of
applications.
standard rolled steel sections
for beams and columns
P3 Calculate the distribution of
shear stress and the angular
deflection due to torsion in
solid and hollow circular shafts.
LO2 Analyse dynamic mechanical systems
P4 Analyse the energy transfer D2 Evaluate the behaviour
M2 Analyse dynamic aspects
processes within mechanical of mechanical dynamic
of given mechanical
systems that are operating in systems by applying
system(s) using vector
appropriate
uniform acceleration motion diagrams of velocities and
methodologies.
accelerations within planar
P5 Analyse the magnitude and
mechanisms.
effect of gyroscopic reaction
torque.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
69
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Pass Merit Distinction
LO3 Investigate elements of simple mechanical power
transmission systems
P6 Investigate the behaviour of M3 Examine devices which D3 Evaluate the cause of
compound gear systems and function to store mechanical a documented case of
the holding torque required to energy in their operation. mechanical power
securely mount a gearbox transmission failure, and
the steps to correct the
P7 Investigate the operating
problem and to rectify
efficiency of lead screws and
any design faults.
screw jacks
P8 Explain the conditions
required for a constant velocity
ratio between two joined
shafts.
LO4 Analyse natural and damped vibrations within
translational and rotational mass-spring systems
P9 Analyse the natural M4 Analyse the transient D4 Determine the
frequency of vibration in response within a mass- conditions needed for
a mass-spring system. spring damper system. mechanical resonance,
and proposed measures
to prevent this from
occurring.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
70
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Aremu B. (2023) Introduction to Mechanical Engineering Science: A solid foundation of
sound engineering principles, analysis and technical problem-solving skills (Paperback).
IngramSpark.
Bird J. and Ross C. (2020) Mechanical Engineering Principles . 4th Ed. London: Routledge.
Hibbeler R.C. (2023) Mechanics of Materials . SI Edition. 11th Ed. Pearson
Hibbeler R.C. (2020) Engineering Mechanics: Dynamics and Statics . SI Edition. 14th Ed.
Pearson.
Moseley H. (2022) The Mechanical Principles of Engineering and Architecture (Paperback).
Legare Street Press.
Rao S.S. (2023) Mechanical Vibrations in SI Units . 6th Ed. Pearson
Tooley M. and Dingle L. (2020) Engineering Science: For Foundation Degree and Higher
National . 2nd Ed. London: Routledge.
Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
International Journal of Mechanical Sciences
Journal of Mechanical Engineering
Journal of Mechanical Engineering Research and Developments
Journal of Mechanical Science and Technology
Mechanical Engineering Journal
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4001: Engineering Design
Unit 4002: Engineering Maths
Unit 5003: Advanced Mechanical Principles.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
71
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025