Unit 4011: Fluid Mechanics
Unit Code: T/651/0724
Level: 4
Credits: 15
Introduction
Fluid mechanics is an important subject to scientists and engineers of many
disciplines, not just those working directly with fluid systems. Mechanical engineers
need to understand the principles of hydraulic devices and turbines (wind and water);
aeronautical engineers use these concepts to understand flight and design flying
machines, while civil engineers typically concentrate on water supply, sewerage,
and irrigation.
This unit introduces students to the fluid mechanics principles and techniques used
in mechanical engineering. In particular, the hydraulic devices and systems that
incorporate the transmission of hydraulic pressure and forces exerted by a static
fluid on immersed surfaces.
Topics included in this unit are: pressure and force, submerged surfaces, fluid flow
theory, aerodynamics, and hydraulic machinery.
On successful completion of this unit students will be able to learn about the concept
and measurement of viscosity in fluids, and the characteristics of Newtonian and non-
Newtonian fluids; fluid flow phenomena, including energy conservation, estimation of
head loss in pipes and viscous drag; and the operational characteristics of hydraulic
machines, in particular the operating principles of various water turbines and pumps.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
86
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Determine the behavioural characteristics of static fluid systems
LO2 Examine the operating principles and limitations of viscosity measuring devices
LO3 Investigate dynamic fluid parameters of real fluid flow
LO4 Explore the operating principles and efficiencies of hydraulic machines.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
87
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Determine the behavioural characteristics of static fluid systems
Pressure and force:
How Pascal’s laws define hydrostatic pressure
Pressure with the use of manometers
Transmission of force in hydraulic systems and devices.
Submerged surfaces:
Determining thrust on immersed surfaces
Moments of area and parallel axis theorem
Calculating centre of pressure with moments of area.
LO2 Examine the operating principles and limitations of viscosity measuring
devices
Viscosity in fluids:
Dimensional analysis (the Buckingham π theorem)
Dynamic and kinematic viscosity definitions
Characteristics of Newtonian fluids
Effects of temperature on viscosity
Classification of non-Newtonian fluids.
Operating principles and limitations:
Operating principles of viscometers
Rheometers for Non Newtonian fluids
Converting results acquired from viscometers into viscosity values.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
88
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO3 Investigate dynamic fluid parameters of real fluid flow
Fluid flow theory:
Energy present within a flowing fluid and the formulation of Bernoulli’s Equation
Classification of fluid flow using Reynolds numbers
Calculations of flow within pipelines
Head losses that occur within a fluid flowing in a pipeline
Viscous drag resulting from fluid flow and the formulation of the drag equation.
Aerodynamics:
Application of prior theory of fluid flow to aerodynamics
Principles of aerofoils and lift-induced drag
Flow measuring devices and their operating principles.
LO4 Explore the operating principles and efficiencies of hydraulic machines
Hydraulic machinery:
Operating principles of different types of water turbine
Reciprocating and centrifugal pump theory
Efficiencies of different types of hydraulic machinery
Environmental concerns surrounding hydraulic machines.
Use of relevant problem-solving tools within the context of a chosen
scenario/sector e.g. root cause analysis (RCA), process failure modes effects
analysis (PFMEA), fishbone, practical problem solving (PPS) and advanced
product quality planning (APQP).
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
89
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Determine the behavioural characteristics of static
fluid systems
P1 Determine force and M1 Carry out appropriate D1 Explain the use and
centre of pressure on calculations on force and limitations of manometers
submerged surfaces. centre of pressure on to measure pressure.
submerged surfaces.
P2 Examine the parameters
of hydraulic devices that are
used in the transmission of
force.
LO2 Examine the operating principles and limitations of
viscosity measuring devices
P3 Examine the operation M2 Explain, with examples, D2 Illustrate the results
and constraints of different the effects of temperature of a viscosity test on a
viscometers that quantify and shear forces on Newtonian fluid at various
viscosity in fluids. Newtonian and non- temperatures with those
Newtonian fluids. given on a data sheet and
P4 Carry out appropriate
explain discrepancies.
calculations on the effect of
changes in temperature and
other constraints on the
viscosity of a fluid.
LO3 Investigate dynamic fluid parameters of real fluid flow
P5 Determine parameters of a M3 Explain the effect of D3 Analyse the head
flowing fluid using Bernoulli’s aerodynamic drag and lift losses accumulated by a
Equation. on aerofoils. fluid when flowing in a
pipeline for various
P6 Investigate the flow of a
applications.
fluid using Reynold’s numbers
and the significance of this
information.
LO4 Explore the operating principles and efficiencies of
hydraulic machines
P7 Determine the efficiency M4 Analyse the limitations D4 Critically analyse the
of a water turbine. that exist within different arguments concerning
types of water turbine. the ecological impact of
P8 Calculate the input power
hydroelectric power.
requirements of centrifugal
pumps.
P9 Explore operating
efficiencies and applications
of two different hydraulic
machines.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
90
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Cengel Y.A. and Cimbala J.M. (2018) Fluid Mechanics: Fundamentals and Applications.
4th Ed: McGraw-Hill Education
Elger D.F., Williams B.C. and Crowe C.T. (2022) Engineering fluid mechanics.
John Wiley & Sons.
Han J. and wright L. (2020) Experimental Methods in Heat Transfer and Fluid Mechanics.
1st Edition. CRC Press.
Hibbeler R.C. (2020) Fluid Mechanics in SI Units. 2nd edition. Pearson.
Mott R.L. and Untener A. (2023) Applied Fluid Mechanics, Global Edition. 7th edition.
Pearson.
Rathakrishnan E. (2022) Encyclopaedia of Fluid Mechanics. 1st Edition. CRC Press.
Rathakrishnan E. (2022) Fluid mechanics: An introduction. PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd.
Rodrigues J.F. and Sequeira A. (2020) Mathematical Topics in Fluid Mechanics.
CRC Press.
Shivamoggi B.K. (2022) Introduction to Theoretical and Mathematical Fluid Dynamics.
Wiley.
Uddin N. (2023) Fluid Mechanics: A Problem-Solving Approach. 1st Edition. CRC Press.
White F. and Xue H. (2020) Fluid Mechanics. 9th Edition. McGraw-Hill.
Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics
Experiments in Fluids
Fluid Dynamics
Journal of Applied Fluid Mechanics
Journal of Fluid Mechanics
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
91
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4024: Electro, Pneumatic and Hydraulic Systems
Unit 5023: Thermofluids.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
92
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025