Unit 4013: Fundamentals of
Thermodynamics and Heat
Transfer
Unit Code: D/651/0727
Level: 4
Credits: 15
Introduction
Thermodynamics is one of the most common applications of science in our lives,
and it is so much a part of our daily life that it is often taken for granted. For example,
when driving your car, the chemical energy from the fuel or electrical energy from the
batteries are converted into mechanical energy to propel the vehicle, and the heat
produced by burning gas when cooking will produce steam which can lift the lid of the
pan. These are examples of thermodynamics, which is the study of the dynamics and
behaviour of energy and its manifestations.
This unit introduces students to the principles and concepts of thermodynamics and
its application in modern engineering.
On successful completion of this unit students will be able to learn about fundamental
thermodynamic systems and their properties, the steady flow energy equation to
plant equipment, principles of heat transfer to industrial applications, and the
performance of internal combustion engines.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
99
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Investigate fundamental thermodynamic systems and their properties
LO2 Apply the Steady Flow Energy Equation for analysis of thermodynamic systems
LO3 Determine the performance of heat engines
LO4 Examine the principles of heat transfer applied to industrial applications.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
100
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Investigate fundamental thermodynamic systems and their properties
Fundamental systems:
Application Areas of Thermodynamics
Forms of energy and basic definitions
Energy, Work and Power
Thermodynamic state and equilibrium
Definitions of systems (open and closed) and surroundings
Properties of pure substances and property tables.
First law of thermodynamics
The gas laws: Charles’ Law, Boyle’s Law, general gas law and the Characteristic
Gas Equation.
The importance and applications of pressure/volume diagrams and the concept
of work done
Polytrophic processes: constant pressure, constant volume, adiabatic,
isothermal and isentropic process.
LO2 Apply the Steady Flow Energy Equation for analysis of thermodynamic
systems
Energy equations:
Conventions used when describing the behaviour of heat and work
The Non-Flow Energy Equation as it applies to closed systems
Assumptions, applications and examples of practical systems
Steady Flow Energy Equation as applied to open systems
Assumptions made about the conditions around, energy transfer and the
calculations for specific plant equipment e.g., boilers, super-heaters, turbines,
pumps and condensers
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
101
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO3 Determine the performance of heat engines
Performance:
Application of the second law of thermodynamics to heat engines, heat pumps
and Refrigerators.
Reversible and Irreversible Processes
Comparison of theoretical and practical heat engine cycles, including Otto,
Diesel and Carnot
Explanations of practical applications of heat engine cycles, such as compression
ignition (CI) and spark ignition (SI) engines with alternative fuels such as biofuels,
hydrogen and ammonia, including their relative mechanical and thermodynamic
efficiencies
Describe possible efficiency improvements to heat engines.
LO4 Examine the principles of heat transfer applied to industrial applications
Principles of heat transfer:
Modes of heat transfer: conduction, convection and radiation
Heat conduction in plane walls and thermal resistance concept
Heat transfer through composite walls and use of U and k values
Heat losses in thick and thin walled pipes, optimum lagging thickness
Application of heat transfer to different types of heat exchangers,
including recuperator and evaporative
Regenerators
Safety first culture: health and safety policies, procedures and regulations;
compliance; risk assessment process and procedures and mitigation.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
102
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Investigate fundamental thermodynamic systems and
their properties
P1 Investigate the operation M1 Investigate the index of D1 Apply the first law
of thermodynamic systems compression in polytrophic principles to derive the
identifying its boundaries processes. work and heat transfer for
and surroundings. thermodynamic processes
of perfect gas.
P2 Explain the application
of the first law of
thermodynamics to
appropriate systems.
P3 Explain the relationships
between system constants
for a perfect gas.
LO2 Apply the Steady Flow Energy Equation for analysis of
thermodynamic systems
P4 Explain system M2 Apply Steady Flow Energy D2 Evaluate application
parameters using the Equations for analysis of of Steady Flow Energy
Non-Flow Energy Equation. open systems. Equation for analysis of
complex open systems.
P5 Apply the Steady Flow
Energy Equation to plant
equipment.
LO3 Determine the performance of heat engines
P6 Describe with the aid of M3 Analyse the operating D3 Calculate the working
a PV (pressure volume) the condition of Carnot heat fluid properties in an ideal
principals of Carnot or Otto engine/heat pumps with Otto/Diesel cycle and the
or Diesel cycles based on the the efficiency. cycle efficiency.
air-standard assumptions.
P7 Determine the maximum
efficiency of heat engine or
heat pump or refrigerators.
LO4 Examine the principles of heat transfer applied to
industrial applications
P8 Examine the principles M4 Explore heat losses D4 Distinguish the
of heat transfer through through lagged and unlagged differences between
composite walls. pipes. parallel and counter
flow recuperator heat
P9 Apply heat transfer
exchangers and their heat
formulae to heat exchangers.
transfer efficiencies
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
103
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Ansermet J.P. and Brechet S.D. (2019) Principles of Thermodynamics Hardcover.
Cambridge University Press.
Assael M.J., Maitland G.C., Maskow T., Von Stockar U., Wakeham W.A. and Will S.
(2022) Commonly asked questions in thermodynamics . CRC Press.
Borgnakke C. and Sonntag R. (2022) Fundamental of Thermodynamics . 10th Ed. Wiley
Cengel Y. (2019) Thermodynamics: An Engineering Approach SI , 9th Ed. McGraw Hill.
Cengel Y. (2020) Heat and Mass Transfer: Fundamentals and Applications , 6th Ed.
McGraw Hill.
Desmet B. (2022) Thermodynamics of Heat Engines . Wiley.
Heywood J. (2018) Internal combustion engine fundamentals . McGraw-Hill.
Holman J. (2009) Heat Transfer . McGraw- Hill.
Lee J.H. and Ramamurthi K. (2022) Fundamentals of thermodynamics . CRC Press.
Lewis G.N., Randall M., Pitzer K.S. and Brewer L. (2020) Thermodynamics .
Courier Dover Publications.
Packer N. and Al-Shemmeri T. (2018) Conventional and Alternative Power Generation:
Thermodynamics, Mitigation and Sustainability . Wiley.
Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
Applied Thermal Engineering
International Communications in Heat and Mass Transfer
International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer
International Journal of Thermal Sciences
Journal of Turbomachinery
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 5005: Further Thermodynamics.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
104
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025