Unit 4014: Production Engineering for
Manufacture
Unit Code: H/651/0729
Level: 4
Credits: 15
Introduction
All of the manufactured products we use in our daily lives, from processed food to
clothing and cars, are the result of production engineering. Production engineers
need to have a comprehensive knowledge and understanding of all the possible
production technologies available, their advantages and disadvantages, the
requirements of the production system operation and the interaction between
the various components of the production system.
This unit introduces students to the production process for key material types; the
various types of machinery used to manufacture products and the different ways of
organising production systems to optimise the production process; consideration of
how to measure the effectiveness of a production system within the overall context
of the manufacturing system; and an examination of how production engineering
contributes to ensuring safe and reliable operation of manufacturing.
On successful completion of this unit students will be able to learn about the role and
purpose of production engineering and its relationship with the other elements of a
manufacturing system; most appropriate production processes and associated facility
arrangements for manufacturing products of different material types; and designing
a production system incorporating a number of different production processes.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
105
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Illustrate the role and purpose of production engineering and its relationship
with the other elements of a manufacturing system
LO2 Describe the most appropriate production processes and associated facility
arrangements for manufacturing products of different material types
LO3 Analyse how a production system can incorporate a number of different
production processes for a given product or assembly
LO4 Explore the effectiveness of a production system in terms of its operation
within the wider manufacturing system.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
106
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Illustrate the role and purpose of production engineering and its
relationship with the other elements of a manufacturing system
Production engineering activities:
Common practices for manufacturing
Research and develop tools, processes, machines, and equipment
Integrate facilities, production layout, and systems for producing quality
products
Design, implement and refine products, services, processes and systems,
considering manufacture, assembly and end of life
Use financial planning, recording and review processes and documentation,
budgets, estimating, cost control, cost forecasting, and investment appraisal
Application of quality system tools to support production engineering to include,
Inspection strategies, Check Sheets, Fishbone Diagram, Histogram, Pareto Chart,
Control Chart, Scatter Diagram and Process Flowcharts.
Combination of manufacturing technology and management science.
LO2 Describe the most appropriate production processes and associated facility
arrangements for manufacturing products of different material types
Production processes:
Common ceramics, polymer, composite, and metals manufacturing processes
The influence of mechanical and physical properties of the materials on the
production process. Bonding and jointing technologies, including welding,
adhesives, fasteners, locking and retaining methods, interference fits and
mechanical assemblies.
LO3 Analyse how a production system can incorporate a number of different
production processes for a given product or assembly
Function of the range of production facilities within a manufacturing plant:
Production design for manufacture and assembly
Cellular and flexible manufacturing systems
Component production using CNC machining centres and automated production
processes (single, batch, flow, mass)
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
107
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Automated materials handling equipment, conveyor systems, automatic guided
vehicle servicing, product assembly and production lines
Heat treatment facilities, paint and coating plants
Warehouse, stock storage equipment
The purpose, operation and effects of incorporating concepts such as lean
manufacturing and just-in-time (JIT) supply to the production process
Relevant manufacturing methods used and their applications, such as
machining, joining, forming, assembling, shaping, processing, printing,
moulding, extruding and casting.
LO4 Explore the effectiveness of a production system in terms of its operation
within the wider manufacturing system
Production systems:
Production performance criteria, through-put rates, yield rates,
cost effectiveness, sustainability, flexibility and reliability
Optimising supply chain performance and management
Documentation control processes and procedures such as format,
location, access, authorisation
Production documentation management: job cards/build records,
2D & 3D drawing/models, Bill of Materials (BOM), Cost Analysis Reports,
Compliance Report, Standard Operating Instructions (SOI’s), Standard Process
Instructions (POI’s), Engineering Query Notifications (EQN’s) and Drawing Query
Notifications (DQN’s)
Use of Industry 4.0 tools/technologies and integration to promote effectiveness
and operations (e.g. automation, robots, PLCs, digital systems and
manufacturing engineering systems)
Essential collaboration between manufacturer, supplier and retailer.
Production errors and rectification:
Cost in terms of time, material waste, product recall, reputation and litigation
Production data collection, critical evaluation and analysis; effective use of data
collection systems and data formats.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
108
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



The human component:
Human factors. Impact of organisational, job and environment factors on
individual performance, characteristics, and behaviours at workplace
Cultural openness to new ideas and continuous improvement
Technically savvy to encourage advanced/latest technologies for efficiencies
including performance optimisation
Collaboration and information sharing.
Performance management and rewards
Engineer training and development practices.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
109
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Illustrate the role and purpose of production engineering
and its relationship with the other elements of a
manufacturing system
P1 Illustrate multiple M1 Assess how the D1 Analyse how the
elements of a modern production engineer can production engineer
manufacturing system. influence the design process supports the development
and refine products, services of operational strategies
P2 Explain the role of the
and systems, taking into to achieve production and
production engineer within a
account optimisation and cost financial objectives.
manufacturing system.
effectiveness.
LO2 Describe the most appropriate production processes and
associated facility arrangements for manufacturing products
of different material types
P3 Examine the properties M2 Discuss the benefits D2 Evaluate how the
and applications of ceramic associated with polymer choice of bonding and
products manufactured using manufacturing process. jointing processes
the sintering, hot pressing, influences both the
chemical vapour deposition product design and the
(CVD) and reaction bonding selection of the most
processes. effective production
process.
P4 Describe the properties
and applications of
composite products
manufactured using manual
and automated layup,
filament winding, pultrusion
and resin transfer moulding
processes.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
110
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Pass Merit Distinction
LO3 Analyse how a production system can incorporate a
number of different production processes for a given product
or assembly
P5 Review the type and M3 Explain how materials, D3 Critique the
sequence of production components and sub- relationships of just-in-
processes a product or assembly handling and time (JIT) and lean
component would follow conveyance can impact on manufacturing to total
from initial design through to the effectiveness and quality and world-class
manufacture and distribution efficiency of a modern manufacturing and their
manufacturing plant. effects on production
P6 Analyse the function of the
processes for a given
various production processes
product or assembly.
within a modern
manufacturing plant
considering the benefits
and drawbacks.
LO4 Explore the effectiveness of a production system in terms
of its operation within the wider manufacturing system
P7 Review the type of data M4 Explain the immediate D4 Analyse the criteria
that would be collected and long-term effects that by which production
and analysed to measure production errors and performance can be
production performance rectification can have on a measured within the wider
manufacturing company. manufacturing system.
P8 Explore the measures that
can improve production
performance criteria.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
111
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Baudin M. and Netland T. (2023) Introduction to Manufacturing: An Industrial Engineering
and Management Perspective . 1st Ed. Routledge.
Burduk A., Batako A.D.L., Machado J., Wyczolkowski R., Dostatni E. and Rojek I. (Editors
(2023) Intelligent Systems in Production Engineering and Maintenance III − Lecture Notes in
Mechanical Engineering (Paperback). Springer.
Davim J.P. (Editor) (2016) Design of Experiments in Production Engineering . Springer
International Publishing Switzerland.
Durakbasa N.M. and Gencyilmaz M.G. (Editors) (2021) Digitizing Production Systems:
Selected Papers from ISPR2021 − Lecture Notes in Mechanical Engineering (Paperback).
Springer.
Grote K.H. and Hefazi H. (Editors) (2021) Springer Handbook of Mechanical Engineering .
Springer Nature.
Groover M.P. (2020) Fundamentals of Modern Manufacturing: Materials, Processes,
and Systems . John Wiley & Sons.
Machado C. and Davim J.P. (Editors) (2022) Green Production Engineering and
Management . 1st Ed. Woodhead Publishing.
Mair G. (2019) Essential Manufacturing . Wiley.
Phanden R.K., Kumar R., Pandey P.M., and Chakraborty A. (Editors) (2023) Advances in
Industrial and Production Engineering: Select Proceedings of FLAME 2022 − Lecture Notes
in Mechanical Engineering (Paperback). Springer.
Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
Advances in Production Engineering and Management
International Journal of Production Research
Journal of Industrial and Production Engineering
Management Systems in Production Engineering
Production Engineering
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
112
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4023: Computer Aided Design and Manufacture (CAD/CAM)
Unit 5015: Manufacturing Systems Engineering.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
113
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025