Unit 4015: Automation, Robotics and
Programmable Logic
Controllers (PLCs)
Unit Code: M/651/0731
Level: 4
Credits: 15
Introduction
The word automation was not used until the 1940s and it originated in the automotive
manufacturing sector as a method designed to reduce labour costs and improve the
quality, accuracy and precision of the finished products. We are all now very familiar
with the sight of dancing robots, not only in the production of cars but in everything
from washing machines to pharmaceuticals. As a result of this technology the
products we purchase may have never been touched by human hands and we all
benefit from a reduction in costs and improvement in quality.
The aim of this unit is for students to investigate how Programmable Logic Controllers
(PLCs) and industrial robots can be programmed to successfully implement
automated engineering solutions.
Among the topics included in this unit are: PLC system operational characteristics,
different types of programming languages, types of robots and cell safety features.
On successful completion of this unit students will be able to learn about
programming PLCs and robotic manipulators to implement a set of activities, different
types and uses of PLCs and robots available, writing PLC programs using a language
of their choice, and program industrial robots with straightforward commands and
safety factors.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
114
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Describe the design and operational characteristics of a PLC system
LO2 Design a PLC program by considering function requirements, PLC information,
programming and communication techniques
LO3 Program industrial robots using commands to perform a given task with the
knowledge of the key elements and their functions
LO4 Investigate the design and safe operation of a robot within an industrial
application.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
115
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Describe the design and operational characteristics of a PLC system
System operational characteristics:
Modular, unitary and rack mounted systems
Characteristics, including speed, memory, scan time, voltage and current limits
Input and output devices (digital, analogue)
Interface requirements
Communication standards (RS-232, RS-422, RS-485, Ethernet)
Industrial communication networks at Supervisory (e.g. Ethernet), Cell (e.g.
PROFINET/PROFIBUS) and Field (e.g. AS-Interface) levels; industrial networks
configuration and commissioning; installation, application and operational
aspects
Industrial Communication Protocols (e.g., Profinet, EtherNet/IP, Powerlink)
Internal architecture
Different types of programming languages (IEC 61131-3)
Programmable Logic Controllers (PLC), Variable Speed Drives (VSD), Human
Machine Interface (HMI) and Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA).
LO2 Design a PLC program by considering function requirements, PLC
information, programming and communication techniques
Programming language:
Signal types
Number systems (binary, octal, hexadecimal)
Allocation lists of inputs and outputs
Communication techniques
Network methods
Logic functions (AND, OR, XOR)
Associated elements (timers, counters, latches)
PLC, HMI & SCADA configuration, and programming
Modern context of PLC programming and Automation
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
116
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Test and debug methods:
Systematic testing and debugging methods
Proper application of appropriate testing and debugging methods
LO3 Program industrial robots using commands to perform a given task with
the knowledge of the key elements and their functions
Element considerations:
Types of robots
Mobile robotics
Sensors, tools and end effectors
Programming methods
Key functions/commands and application in designing and implementing
robot tasks
Robotics hardware and software tools, configuration, calibration, programming,
and fault finding
Robot manipulators (kinematics, design, dynamics and control, vision systems,
user interfaces, instrumentation configuration and calibration); effective use of
data collection tools/systems and data formats for inputs/outputs within the
context.
Impact of Industry 4.0:
Automation, robots, PLCs, smart factories using Industry 4.0 based technologies
(e.g., data and digital technologies/systems)
Performance optimisation
Documentation control processes and procedures such as format, location,
access, authorisation
Integration and impact on organisations.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
117
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO4 Investigate the design and safe operation of a robot within an industrial
application
Safety:
Health and safety policies, procedures and regulations, potential hazards,
risk assessment and mitigation
Cell safety features
Operating envelope
Operational modes
User interfaces
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
118
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Describe the design and operational characteristics of a
PLC system
P1 Describe the key differences M1 Explain the different D1 Analyse the internal
of PLC types and configurations, types of PLC programming architecture of a typical PLC
and their typical applications. languages available. to determine its operational
applications.
P2 Determine the types of PLC
input and output devices
available.
P3 Describe the different types
of communication links used
with PLCs.
LO2 Design a PLC program by considering function
requirements, PLC information, programming and
communication techniques
P4 Design key elements that M2 Integrate methods D2 Create a fully functional
have to be considered in the used for testing and PLC design for a given
preparation of a PLC program. debugging PLC hardware industrial task, with
and software. performance analysis.
P5 Explain how communication
connections are correctly used
with the PLC.
LO3 Program industrial robots using commands to perform a
given task with the knowledge of the key elements and their
functions
P6 Using a selection of M3 Investigate a given D3 Produce a fully working
commands, program an industrial robotic system robotic program for a given
industrial robot to perform and make industry task, with an
given task. recommendations for illustrated scope for further
improvement. improvements to achieve
P7 Explain the types of robot
complex tasks.
tools, sensors, and end
effectors available and their
applications.
LO4 Investigate the design and safe operation of a robot
within an industrial application
P8 Investigate the safety M4 Analyse how the D4 Design a safe working
systems used within an systems in place ensure plan for an industrial
industrial robotic cell. safe operation of a given robotic cell in a given
industrial robotic cell. production process,
including a full risk
assessment.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
119
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Auat F., Prieto P. and Fantoni G. (Editors) (2022) Rapid Roboting: Recent Advances on
3D Printers and Robotics − Intelligent Systems, Control and Automation: Science and
Engineering 82 (Hardback). Springer.
Bolton W. (2015) Programmable Logic Controllers . 6th Ed. Elsevier.
Bozek P., Krenický T. and Nikitin Y. (Editors) (2022) Automation and Robotics:
Latest Achievements, Challenges and Prospects (Hardback). Mdpi AG.
Dawkins N. (ed.) (2014) Automation and Controls: A guide to Automation, Controls,
PLCs and PLC Programming .
Johnson Jr C.H. and Sanusi A.L. (2022) PLC Programming from Novice to Professional:
Learn PLC Programming with Training Videos (Paperback). Ojula Technology Innovations .
Kumar K. and Babu B.S. (Editors) (2023 ) Industrial Automation and Robotics −
Techniques and Applications . 1st Ed. CRC Press.
Manesis S. and Nikolakopoulos G. (2018) Introduction to Industrial Automation. 1st Ed.
Routledge, Taylor and Francis Group.
Perez A. E. (2012) Introduction to PLCs: A beginner’s guide to Programmable Logic
Controllers .
Petruzella F. (2023) Programmable Logic Controllers. 6th Ed. McGraw Hill.
Stewart G.R. (2021) Siemens Plc Programming For Beginners: (Step-by-Step Instructions)
How Can I Quickly and Easily Learn PLC Programming At Home? Independent publication.
White M.T. (2023) Mastering PLC Programming: The software engineering survival guide to
automation programming (Paperback). Packt Publishing Limited.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
120
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
Automation and Remote Control
Automation
IFAC Journal of Systems and Control
IEEE Journal on Robotics and Automation
International Journal of Automation and Control (IJAAC)
Journal of AI, Robotics and Workplace Automation
Journal of Automation and Intelligence
Programmable Logic Controllers (Special issue)
Robotics
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4006: Mechatronics
Unit 5009: Further Programmable Logic Controllers (PLCs).
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
121
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025