Unit 4016: Instrumentation and Control
Systems
Unit Code: T/651/0733
Level: 4
Credits: 15
Introduction
Instrumentation and control can also be described as measurement automation,
which is a very important area of engineering. It is responsible for the safe control of a
wide range of processes from power stations to manufacturing facilities and even the
cruise control in cars.
This unit introduces students to the important principles, components, and practices
of instrumentation in controlling of a system, together with the terminology,
techniques and components that are used in such a system.
Among the topics included in this unit are: instrumentation systems, instrumentation
signal terminology, signal conversion and conditioning, process control systems,
process controller terminology, system terminology and concepts, system tuning
techniques and application of predicted values to a control system.
On successful completion of this unit students will be able to learn about the
measurement of system parameters to a successful process control performance,
when and how such measurements are carried out, and developing skills in applying
predicted values in order to ensure stability within a control system for a range of
input wave forms.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
122
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Describe operation of instrumentation devices including parameters used in
process control
LO2 Investigate process control systems and controllers
LO3 Analyse the control concepts used within an industrial process
LO4 Apply predicted values to ensure stability within a control system.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
123
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Describe operation of instrumentation devices including parameters used
in process control
Instrumentation systems:
Sensors and transducers used in instrumentation including resistive, inductive,
capacitive, ultrasonic, pressure, semiconductor, thermocouple and optical
Investigate key design aspects of instrumentation systems using latest industry
case studies.
Instrumentation signal terminology:
The importance of instrumentation signal terminology, error, drift, repeatability,
including the difference between accuracy and precision, reliability, linearity,
sensitivity, resolution, range, and hysteresis.
Signal conversion and conditioning:
Conversion and conditioning of signals, including analogue, digital, optical,
microprocessor, wireless and industry standard signal ranges.
LO2 Investigate process control systems and controllers
Process control systems:
The need for process control systems, including quality, safety, consistency,
optimisation, efficiency, cost and environmental considerations
Investigate key design aspects of instrumentation systems using latest industry
case studies.
Process controller terminology:
Defining set point, process value, output, error, gain, deviation, range, on-off
control, two step control and three term control PID (proportional, integral and
derivative).
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
124
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO3 Analyse the control concepts used within an industrial process
System terminology and concepts:
Recognise system terminology and concepts, including distance velocity lags,
capacity, resistance, static and dynamic gain, feedback types, open and closed
loop, feed forward control and stability (underdamped, overdamped and
critically damped system).
System tuning techniques:
Familiarise with system tuning techniques, including Zeigler-Nichols, continuous
cycling, reaction curves, decay methods and overshoot tuning.
LO4 Apply predicted values to ensure stability within a control system
Predicted values:
Investigate block diagram representation of a simplified feedback system (plant
and controller) and a closed-loop control system (reference input, controller,
plant, feedback, error).
Investigate transfer function representation for a first and second order
closed-loop system.
Apply predicted values to a given open and closed loop control system using
simulation, to investigate system response to a range of input signal types,
evaluate stability of the system using its key parameters (settling time, rise time,
peak time, peak value, overshoot, steady state error) and propose possible
improvements.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
125
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Describe operation of instrumentation devices including
parameters used in process control
P1 Describe operation of M1 Explore industrial D1 Critically review the
the key types of sensor and applications for sensors industrial application of
transducers used in process and transducers. an instrumentation and
control. control process system,
M2 Analyse the accuracy of
using research evidence.
P2 Define the signal the sensors and transducers
terminology used in process used in a particular
control. application.
P3 Explain the different
methods and standards used
in signal conversion and
conditioning.
LO2 Investigate process control systems and controllers
P4 Investigate the importance D2 Propose
M3 Analyse a typical industrial
of process control systems. recommendations for
application for a process
improvements to process
control system.
P5 Explore the process
control systems and
controller terminology used
controllers.
in industrial applications.
LO3 Analyse the control concepts used within an industrial
process
P6 Examine the control M4 Analyse how the D3 Critically review the
terminology and concepts simulated control system reasoning behind system
used in process control responds to a range of signal response as different
systems. inputs, in the context of a signals are applied,
given industrial process. in the context of a given
P7 Analyse system tuning
industrial process.
methods and techniques
employed to improve
performance.
LO4 Apply predicted values to ensure stability within a control
system
P8 Demonstrate the correct D4 Argue why the system
M5 Show how the virtual
use of an instrumentation responds in a certain way
control system responds to a
and control virtual as the signals are applied,
range of signal inputs with
including stability aspects
simulation. technical narrative.
and possible
P9 Apply tuning techniques in
improvements.
a typical industrial application
using simulation.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
126
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Bolton W. (2021) Instrumentation and Control Systems . 3rd Ed. Elsevier.
Dabney J.B. and Harman T.L. (2003) Mastering Simulink . Prentice Hall.
Dorf R.C. and Bishop R.H. (2022) Modern Control Systems . 14th Ed. Pearson.
Essic J. (2018) Hands-On Introduction to LabVIEW for Scientists and Engineers .
4th Ed. Oxford University Press.
Iqbal K. (2020) A First Course in Control System Design. 2nd Ed. River Publishers.
Kondratenko Y.P, Kuntsevich V.M., Chikrii A.A. and Gubarev V.F. (2021)
Advanced Control Systems – Theory and Applications. 1st Ed. River Publishers.
Moore H. (2019) MATLAB for Engineers. 5th Ed. Pearson.
Nagrath I.J. (2022) Control Systems Engineering. 7th Ed. New Age International
Publishers.
Nise N.S. (2011) Control Systems Engineering . 6th Ed. John Wiley & Sons.
Sarangapani J. and Xu H. (2021) Optimal Networked Control Systems with MATLAB.
CRC Press.
Cappelli M. (2023) Instrumentation and Control Systems for Nuclear Power Plants .
1st Ed. Woodhead Publishing.
Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement
Journal of Advanced Research in Instrumentation and Control Engineering
Journal of Control and Instrumentation
Journal of Instrumentation
Journal of Process Control
Transactions of the Institute of Measurement and Control
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
127
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 5007: Commercial Programming Software
Unit 5021: Further Control Systems Engineering.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
128
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025