Unit 4017: Quality and Process
Improvement
Unit Code: Y/651/0734
Level: 4
Credits: 15
Introduction
Quality has always been the key to business success and survivability, but it requires
organisations to allocate a lot of effort and resources to achieve it. The key to
providing quality services and designing top quality products lies in the strength and
effectiveness of the processes used in their development; processes which must be
constantly reviewed to ensure they operate as efficiently, economically and as safely
as possible.
This unit introduces students to the importance of quality assurance processes in a
manufacturing or service environment and the principles and theories that underpin
them. Topics included in this unit are: tools and techniques used to support quality
control, attributes and variables, testing processes, costing modules, the importance
of qualifying the costs related to quality, international standards for management
(ISO 9000, 14000, 18000), European Foundation for Quality Management (EFQM),
principles, tools and techniques of Total Quality Management (TQM) and
implementation of Six Sigma.
On successful completion of this unit students will be able to illustrate the processes
and applications of statistical process, explain the quality control tools used to apply
costing techniques, identify the standards expected in the engineering environment
to improve efficiency and examine how the concept of Total Quality Management
and continuous improvement underpins modern manufacturing and service
environments.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
129
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Examine the applications of statistical process control when applied in an
industrial environment to improve efficiency
LO2 Analyse cost effective quality control tools
LO3 Determine the role of standards in improving efficiency, meeting customer
requirements and opening up new opportunities for trade
LO4 Analyse the importance of Total Quality Management and continuous
improvement in manufacturing and service environments.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
130
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Examine the applications of statistical process control when applied in an
industrial environment to improve efficiency
Quality control:
The tools and techniques used to support quality control
Attributes and variables
Testing processes
Quality tools and techniques, including statistical process control (SPC),
measurement of variables (such as dimensions, weight, signal, temperature,
time,) testing (such as non-destructive and destructive).
Designing quality into new products and processes using Quality Function
Deployment (QFD), and enhance quality in managing and monitoring supplier
performance
Quality assurance: Principles and levels of quality assurance, systems, and
operational consideration. Importance of accurate record keeping and
monitoring of activities.
LO2 Analyse cost effective quality control tools
Quality costing:
Costing modules (including budgeting, forecasting and control of direct and
indirect costs, fixed and variable costs including actual, accrued and committed
costs), analysis and interpretation of data and information
The importance of qualifying the costs related to quality Documentation such as
Parts Per Million (PPM) quality adherence, cost analysis and test data
How costs can be used to improve business performance including achieving
sustainability objectives.
LO3 Determine the role of standards in improving efficiency, meeting customer
requirements and opening up new opportunities for trade
Standards for efficiency:
The history of standards
The role of standards and their importance in enabling and supporting trade,
business and industry; ethical usage of standards and implications
Standards for measurement
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
131
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



International Standards for management: purpose and internal governance
arrangements to ensure compliance; relevant standards (ISO 9000, ISO 9001,
ISO 14000, ISO 14001, ISO 18000, AS9100, TS16949 etc.)
European Foundation for Quality Management (EFQM) as an aid to developing
strategic competitive advantage
Organisation context: Importance and use of organisations approved Standard
Operating Procedures (SOP’s), documentation recording systems and quality
control, risk assessment, and the potential implications on safety, quality and
delivery if they are not adhered to.
LO4 Analyse the importance of Total Quality Management and continuous
improvement in manufacturing and service environments
Overview and function of quality:
The importance of quality to industry: how it underpins the ability to improve
efficiency, meet customer requirements and improve competitiveness, cost of
poor quality.
Principles, tools and techniques of Total Quality Management (TQM)
Advancements in TQM, KPIs and TQM.
Tools for improving quality and delivery. Advanced Product Quality Planning
(APQP). Types of faults/defects recorded and analysed to improve future
performance. Route Cause Analysis (RCA), Failure Mode and Effects Analysis
(FMEA), Fishbone, Practical Problem Solving (PPS), Process Failure Mode and
Effects Analysis (PFMEA). Tools for data collection and analysis, e.g., automatic
test equipment, visual automatic inspection system, data acquisition equipment,
software to analyse the data and inform operators in real time. Tools and
techniques associated with lean manufacturing and process improvement such
as Six Sigma, Kaizan, 8 Wastes. Workplace organisation such as 5S’s (sort, set in
order, shine, standardise and sustain), continuous flow, Poke Yoke (error
proofing), 5 Whys (Root Cause Analysis), kanban (pull System), just-in-time (JIT),
lean simulation activities, value stream mapping, total Preventive Maintenance
Plan-do-check-act (PDCA), Single Minute Exchange of Die (SMED), A3 Reporting.
Other lean operational and quality enhancement practices (e.g., visual
management, waste reduction and shop floor problem solving).
Selecting the most appropriate tool/technique to solve a problem (including
problem analysis models such as Is/Is Not).
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
132
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Examine the applications of statistical process control
when applied in an industrial environment to improve
efficiency
P1 Review the tools and M1 Explain the role and D1 Suggest justified
techniques used to support effectiveness of the quality recommendations for the
quality control. tools and techniques used application of statistical
within an industrial process control in an
P2 Examine the processes
environment. industrial environment
and applications of statistical
to improve efficiency.
process control in a
production environment.
LO2 Analyse cost effective quality control tools
P3 Analyse the effective use M2 Determine with D2 Develop a process
of quality control tools and justification the quality for the application of an
techniques. control tools and techniques extensive range of quality
that could be used to improve control tools and
P4 Compare costing
business performance. techniques, with
techniques used within
emphasis on costing.
industrial environments.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
133
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Pass Merit Distinction
LO3 Determine the role of standards in improving efficiency,
meeting customer requirements and opening up new
opportunities for trade
P5 Determine required M3 Discuss the importance D3 Illustrate a plan
standards to improve of standards applied in the for the application of
efficiency, meet customer engineering environment. international standards
requirements and open up that would improve
new opportunities for trade. efficiency, meet customer
requirements and open
up new opportunities for
trade.
LO4 Analyse the importance of Total Quality Management and
continuous improvement in manufacturing and service
environments
P6 Contrast the principles, M4 Discuss how the D4 Evaluate how the
tools and techniques of Total appropriate application of appropriate application of
Quality Management and Total Quality Management total quality management
continuous improvement. and continuous improvement and continuous
in tools and techniques affect improvement in tools and
P7 Analyse how the concept
quality performance in the techniques affect quality
of Total Quality Management
manufacturing and service performance in the
and continuous improvement
environments. manufacturing and service
could help in delivering high
environments.
quality performance within
businesses.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
134
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Amsden R.T. (2019). SPC simplified: Practical steps to quality . Routledge.
Begum S., Rajendran C., Prakash Sai L., Ganesh K. and Mohapatra S. (2021) Total
Quality Management in Higher Education: Study of Engineering Institutions. 1st Edition.
Routledge India.
Cachon G. and Terwiesch C. (2023) Operations Management. 3rd Edition. McGraw-Hill
Cottmon R.J. (2020) Total Engineering Quality Management. 1st Edition. CRC Press.
Goetsch D.L. and Davis S. (2021) Quality Management for Organizational Excellence:
Introduction to Total Quality. 9th edition. Pearson.
Lim J.S. (2020) Quality Management in Engineering: A Scientific and Systematic Approach .
1st Edition. CRC Press.
Mathur S. (2021 ) Book Review of Total Quality Management in Education .
Management Dynamics .
Montgomery D.C. (2019) Introduction to statistical quality control . John Wiley & sons.
Stevenson W.J (2021) Operations Management. 14th Edition. McGraw-Hill.
Slack, N., Chambers, S. and Johnston, R. (2016) Operations Management .
8th Ed. Essex: Pearson Education Limited.
Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
Journal of Quality in Maintenance Engineering
The TQM Journal
Quality Management Journal
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 5016: Lean Manufacturing
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
135
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025