Unit 4018: Maintenance Engineering
Unit Code: D/651/0736
Level: 4
Credits: 15
Introduction
Plant and equipment are one of the biggest assets for any business, costing huge
sums of money to replace when things go wrong. Without regular maintenance
business owners could see an increase in costly breakdowns, often incurring
downtime and significant loss of earnings. Inspection and maintenance are therefore
vital to detect and prevent any potential equipment issues or faults that would
prevent operation at optimum efficiency. Good maintenance proves itself on a
day-to-day basis.
This unit introduces students to the importance of equipment maintenance
programmes, the benefits that well-maintained equipment brings to an organisation
and the risk factors it faces if maintenance programmes and processes are not
considered or implemented. Topics included in this unit are: statutory regulations,
organisational safety requirements, maintenance strategies, safe working and
maintenance techniques.
On successful completion of this unit students will be able to learn about the
importance of compliance with statutory regulations associated with asset
maintenance, maintenance techniques adopted by the industry, safe working
practices whilst performing maintenance tasks in an industrial environment
and inspection and maintenance techniques.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
136
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Analyse the impact of relevant statutory regulations and organisational safety
requirements on the industrial workplace
LO2 Differentiate between the merits and use of different types of maintenance
strategies in an industrial workplace
LO3 Illustrate competence in working safely by correctly determining the hazards
and risks associated with maintenance techniques
LO4 Apply effective inspection and maintenance techniques relative to a particular
specialisation such as mechanical or electrical.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
137
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Analyse the impact of relevant statutory regulations and organisational
safety requirements on the industrial workplace
Regional and global statutory regulations:
The responsibility of employers and employees with regard to statutory
regulations in the workplace, including: HASWA 1974, MHSWR 1999, PUWER
1998, COSHH, LOLER 1998, Working at Height Regulations, Manual Handling
Operations Regulations 1992, PPE at Work Regulations 1992, Confined Spaces
Regulations 1997, Electricity at Work Regulations 1989, Control of Noise, at Work
Regulations 2005, RIDDOR 1995, CDM Regulations 2015, ACoP HSE Guidance
Notes and Safety Signs
Case studies: Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA),
risk categories, risk assessment and prevention procedures and tools;
country/region specific health and safety executive regulations.
Organisational safety requirements:
The responsibility of the employee with regard to organisational safety
requirements such as the role of the HSE and the power of inspectors,
right of inspection, improvement notices and prohibition notice
Product safety and raw materials safety requirements, Safety Data Sheet (SDS)
of materials, PPE in all stages of operations to ensure safety.
LO2 Differentiate between the merits and use of different types of maintenance
strategies in an industrial workplace
Maintenance strategies:
Definition of, and need for maintenance
Component failure, bathtub curve
Equipment design life and periodic maintenance (e.g. belt adjustment,
lubrication etc)
Reactive, preventive, predictive and reliability centred maintenance
Comparison of the presented maintenance programmes – for example,
Total Productive Maintenance (TPM), Condition Based Maintenance (CBM),
Run-to-Failure Maintenance (RTF), Mean Time Between Failure (MTBF);
compare and adapt latest advances in maintenance programmes
Creation and application of Failure Mode and Effects Analysis
Maintenance schedules and illustration diagrams/tools.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
138
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO3 Illustrate competence in working safely by correctly determining the
hazards and risks associated with maintenance techniques
Working safely:
Life-saving rules for employee safety, such as safety devices and guards, lock out,
tag out, electrical work, arc flash, fall protection and permit required confined
space working
Understanding plant layouts as part of safety training including emergency
exists, workflow chart, stage-wise PPE, and human ergonomics
Development and implementation of safe schemes of work (e.g.,
daily/weekly/monthly checks about the safety measures such as earth resistance,
neutral to earth voltage, lighting illumination, lubrication for bearings, cleaning of
Conveyors, input air pressure and its leakage systems, fire alarm etc.)
Lone working
Permit to work (PTW)
Working safely in confined spaces
Emergency procedures and training
Hazard identification and assessment of risk associated with identified hazard
Use of control measures (ERIC SP)
Production of a Risk Assessment & Method Statement for a maintenance
procedure.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
139
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO4 Apply effective inspection and maintenance techniques relative to a
particular specialisation such as mechanical or electrical
Maintenance techniques:
Importance of isolation and making safe before undertaking maintenance
Adherence to PTW process and shift changeover procedures
In-service (live) preventative maintenance e.g. thermographic survey,
partial discharge inspection
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) − application, and documentation recording
systems, and the potential implications on safety, quality, and delivery if they are
not adhered to
Compliance with manufacturer’s recommended inspection and maintenance
procedures, using manufacturer’s data as case studies
Look, listen and feel philosophy. Visual inspections
Measurements: electrical and mechanical. Mechanical operations test
Functional tests e.g. exercise switching mechanisms
Application of non-destructive examination (NDE) and non-destructive
investigation (NDI) techniques for maintenance e.g. acoustic emission,
eddy current, liquid penetrant, ultrasonics, thermography
Recording data and maintenance records.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
140
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Analyse the impact of relevant statutory regulations
and organisational safety requirements on the industrial
workplace
P1 Describe the key features M1 Assess the D1 Evaluate the likely
of health and safety consequences of consequences of non-
regulations in the workplace. employers not abiding adherence to relevant health
by health and safety and safety legislation, and risk
P2 Analyse the role of the
legislation and prevention measures by
Health and Safety Executive
regulations, and risk employers and employees.
in health and safety in the
assessment in the
workplace. D2 Critically appraise the
workplace.
potential impact of a workplace
inspection by a Health and
Safety Executive inspector
including the role of Safety
Data Sheet (SDS).
LO2 Differentiate between the merits and use of
different types of maintenance strategies in an industrial
workplace
P3 Differentiate methods M2 Explain the D3 Illustrate the most
used to complete importance of selecting appropriate maintenance
engineering maintenance relevant maintenance system in an industrial
in an industrial workplace. methods and carrying workplace.
out engineering
P4 Discuss the advantages D4 Assess the likely
maintenance in an
and disadvantages of consequences of not
industrial workplace.
different strategies to completing a maintenance
complete maintenance in regime in an industrial
an industrial workplace. workplace.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
141
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Pass Merit Distinction
LO3 Illustrate competence in working safely by correctly
determining the hazards and risks associated with
maintenance techniques
P5 Illustrate various methods M3 Discuss the D5 Analyse, using actual
used to identify risks and importance of workplace procedures, the
their associated hazards. completing risk methods used such as SOP to
assessments. deal with identified hazards in
P6 Carry out a risk
accordance with statutory legal
assessment on a typical M4 Explain how control
requirements and workplace
maintenance technique. measures are used to
policies and recommend
prevent accidents.
improvements.
M5 Complete a method
statement for a typical
maintenance technique.
LO4 Apply effective inspection and maintenance
techniques relative to a particular specialisation such as
mechanical or electrical
P7 Apply effective inspection M6 Analyse the D6 Justify appropriate
and maintenance techniques effectiveness of these inspection and maintenance
in an industrial or simulated inspection and techniques across industrial
environment, recording the maintenance techniques plant assets.
appropriate sequence of in plant asset
procedures. management.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
142
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Affleck E. (2022) Maintenance Engineering. New York: Larsen and Keller Education.
Baptista J. (2020) Industrial Maintenance: Techniques, Stories, and Cases. Boca Raton,
Florida: CRC Press.
Dhillon B.S. (2023) System Safety, Maintainability, and Maintenance for Engineers.
Boca Raton, Florida: CRC Press.
Hellier C.J. (2020) Handbook of nondestructive evaluation . 3rd Ed. New York:
McGraw-Hill Education.
Mobley R.K. (2014) Maintenance Engineering Handbook . 8th Ed. New York: McGraw-Hill
Education.
Peng K. (2021) Equipment Management in the Post-Maintenance Era: Advancing in
the Era of Smart Machines. 2nd Ed. Boca Raton, Florida: Productivity Press.
Richardson D.C. (2013) Plant Equipment & Maintenance Engineering Handbook .
New York: McGraw-Hill Education.
The Institution of Engineering and Technology (IET) (2022) Guide to Electrical
Maintenance (IET Codes and Guidance . London: IET.
Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
Journal of Nondestructive Evaluation
Journal of Quality in Maintenance Engineering
Non-Destructive Testing
Nondestructive Testing and Evaluation
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4004: Managing a Professional Engineering Project
Unit 4025: Operations and Plant Management.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
143
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025