Unit 4019: Electrical and Electronic
Principles
Unit Code: F/651/0737
Level: 4
Credits: 15
Introduction
Electrical engineering is mainly concerned with the movement of energy and power in
electrical form, and its generation and consumption. Electronics is mainly concerned
with the manipulation of information, which may be acquired, stored, processed or
transmitted in electrical form. Both depend on the same set of physical principles,
though their applications differ widely. A study of electrical or electronic engineering
depends very much on these underlying principles; these form the foundation for
any qualification in the field, and are the basis of this unit.
The physical principles themselves build initially from our understanding of the atom,
the concept of electrical charge, electric fields, and the behaviour of the electron in
different types of material. This understanding is readily applied to electric circuits of
different types, and the basic circuit laws and electrical components emerge. Another
set of principles is built around semiconductor devices, which become the basis of
modern electronics. An introduction to semiconductor theory leads to a survey of
the key electronic components, primarily different types of diodes and transistors.
Electronics is very broadly divided into analogue and digital applications. The final
section of the unit introduces the fundamentals of these, using simple applications.
Thus, under analogue electronics, the amplifier and its characteristics are introduced.
Under digital electronics, voltages are applied as logic values, and simple circuits
made from logic gates are considered.
On successful completion of this unit students will have a good and wide-ranging
grasp of the underlying principles of electrical and electronic circuits and devices,
and will be able to proceed with confidence to further study.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
144
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Apply an understanding of fundamental electrical quantities to analyse circuits
with constant voltages and currents
LO2 Analyse circuits with sinusoidal voltages and currents
LO3 Describe the basis of semiconductor action, and its application to simple
electronic devices
LO4 Explain the difference between digital and analogue electronics, describing
simple applications of each.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
145
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Apply an understanding of fundamental electrical quantities to analyse
circuits with constant voltages and currents
Fundamental electrical quantities and concepts:
Charge, current, electric field, energy in an electrical context, potential, potential
difference, resistance, electromotive force, conductors, insulators, and electrical
power
Modern applications examples of electrical systems.
Circuit laws:
Voltage sources, Ohm’s law, resistors in series and parallel, the potential divider
Kirchhoff’s laws, Thevenin’s theorem, Norton’s theorem, superposition.
Energy and power:
Transfer into the circuit through, for example, battery, solar panel or generator,
and out of the circuit as heat or mechanical. Maximum power transfer theorem
Power analysis and test methods.
LO2 Analyse circuits with sinusoidal voltages and currents
Fundamental quantities of periodic waveforms:
Frequency, period, peak value, phase angle, waveforms, the importance of
sinusoids.
Mathematical techniques:
Trigonometric representation of a sinusoid. Rotating phasors and the phasor
diagram. Complex notation applied to represent magnitude and phase.
Reactive components:
Principles of the inductor and capacitor. Basic equations, emphasising
understanding of rates of change (of voltage with capacitor, current with
inductor). Current and voltage phase relationships with steady sinusoidal
quantities, representation on phasor diagram; Inductor and capacitor
applications.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
146
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Circuits with sinusoidal sources:
Current and voltage in series and parallel RL, RC, LC and RLC circuits.
Transient and Steady State analysis of RL, RC, LC and RLC circuits
Reactance, impedance, resonance, bandwidth, quality factor
Time and frequency response of filters
Mains voltage single-phase systems. Active power, reactive power,
complex Power, root-mean-square power quantities, power factor
Introduction to DC and AC generators/motors, introduction to three phase
power systems.
Ideal transformer and rectification:
The ideal transformer, half-wave and full-wave rectification. Use of smoothing
capacitor, ripple voltage.
LO3 Describe the basis of semiconductor action, and its application to simple
electronic devices
Semiconductor material:
Characteristics of semiconductors; impact of doping, p-type and n-type
semiconductor materials, the p-n junction in forward and reverse bias.
Simple semiconductor devices:
Characteristics and simple operation of junction diode, Zener diode, light
emitting diode, bipolar transistor, Junction Field Effect Transistor (FET) and
Metal Oxide Semiconductor FET (MOSFET). The bipolar transistor as switch
and amplifier.
Simple semiconductor applications:
Diodes: AC-DC rectification, light emitting diode, voltage regulation
Transistors: switches and signal amplifiers
Modern applications examples of electronic devices.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
147
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO4 Explain the difference between digital and analogue electronics, describing
simple applications of each
Analogue concepts:
Analogue quantities, examples of electrical representation of, for example, audio,
temperature, speed, or acceleration
The voltage amplifier; gain, frequency response, input and output resistance,
effect of source and load resistance (with source and amplifier output modelled
as Thevenin equivalent)
Introduction to operational amplifiers.
Digital concepts:
Logic circuits implemented with switches or relays
Use of voltages to represent logic 0 and 1, binary counting
Logic Gates (AND, OR, NAND, NOR) to create simple combinational
logic functions
Truth Tables.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
148
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Apply an understanding of fundamental electrical
quantities to analyse circuits with constant voltages and
currents
P1 Apply the principles of M1 Apply the principles of D1 Examine the operation
circuit theory to simple circuit theory to a range of of a range of circuits with
circuits with constant sources, circuits with constant constant sources, including
to explain the operation of sources, to explain the power analysis, using
that circuit. operation of that circuit. relevant circuit theories.
LO2 Analyse circuits with sinusoidal voltages and currents
P2 Analyse RLC circuits, using D2 Evaluate the operation
M2 Analyse RLC circuits,
the principles of circuit theory and behaviour of series and
using the principles of circuit
with sinusoidal sources. parallel RLC combined
theory and mathematical
circuits, including
techniques used with
resonance and using the
sinusoidal sources.
principles of circuit theory
with sinusoidal sources.
LO3 Describe the basis of semiconductor action, and its
application to simple electronic devices
P3 Describe the behaviour of M3 Analyse the operation D3 Discuss the
a p-n, pnp, npn junctions in of a range of discrete performance of a range
terms of semiconductor semiconductor devices of semiconductor devices
behaviour. in terms of simple in terms of simple
semiconductor theory. semiconductor theory
P4 Demonstrate the action
and their applications.
of a range of semiconductor
devices in both analytical and
practical settings.
LO4 Explain the difference between digital and analogue
electronics, describing simple applications of each
P5 Explain the difference D4 Evaluate the use of
M4 Critique the benefits
between digital and analogue analogue and digital devices
and drawbacks of using
electronics. and circuits in specific
analogue and digital
applications.
electronic devices using
P6 Explain the operation and
examples.
characteristics of amplifiers
in analytical and practical
settings.
P7 Examine the operation of
logic circuits in analytical and
practical settings.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
149
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Boylestad R.L., Nashelsky, L. (2013) Electronic devices and circuit theory . Pearson.
Boylestad R.L. (2023) Introductory Circuit Analysis. Global Edition. 14th Ed. Pearson.
Bird J. (2013) Electrical Circuit Theory and Technology . Routledge.
Hughes E., Hiley, J., Brown, K. and McKenzie-Smith, I. (2016) Electrical and Electronic
Technology . 12th Ed. Pearson.
th
Floyd T.L. (2017) Digital fundamentals. 11 Ed. Global Edition. Pearson.
Mohindru P. and Mohindru P. (2022) Electronic Circuit Analysis using LTSpice XVII
Simulator: A Practical Guide for Beginners. 1st Ed. CRC Press.
Singh K. (2011) Engineering Mathematics through Applications . 2nd Ed. Palgrave.
Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
Advances in Electrical Engineering, Electronics and Energy
Electronic Letters
Electronics World Magazine
Everyday Practical Electronics Magazine
IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics and Power Electronics
Industrial Economics Society
Journal of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
New Electronics Digital Magazine
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4020: Digital Principles
Unit 4022: Electronic Circuits and Devices
Unit 5019: Further Electrical, Electronic and Digital Principles .
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
150
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025