Unit 4020: Digital Principles
Unit Code: J/651/0739
Level: 4
Credits: 15
Introduction
While the broad field of electronics covers many aspects, it is digital electronics which
now has the greatest impact. This is immediately evident in the mobile phone, laptop,
and numerous other everyday devices and systems. Digital electronics allows us to
process, store, and transmit data in digital form in robust ways, which minimises data
degradation.
The unit introduces digital principles and the two main branches of digital electronics,
combinational and sequential. Thus, the student gains familiarity in the fundamental
elements of digital circuits, notably different types of logic gates and bistables. The
techniques by which such circuits are analysed, introduced, and applied, including
Truth Tables, Boolean Algebra, Karnaugh Maps, and Timing Diagrams.
The theory of digital electronics has little use unless the circuits can be built – at low
cost, high circuit density, and in large quantity. Thus, the key digital technologies are
introduced. These include the conventional TTL (Transistor-Transistor Logic) and
CMOS (Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor). Importantly, the unit moves on
to programmable logic, including the Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA). Finally,
some standard digital subsystems, which become important elements of major
systems such as microprocessors, are introduced and evaluated.
On successful completion of this unit students will have a good grasp of the principles
of digital electronic circuits, and will be able to proceed with confidence to further
study.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
151
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Explain combinational logic circuits
LO2 Interpret sequential logic circuits
LO3 Describe the technologies used to implement digital electronic circuits
LO4 Analyse a range of digital subsystems, hence establishing the building blocks for
larger systems.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
152
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Explain combinational logic circuits
Concepts and applications:
Digital principles, logic design and logic circuits, real-world applications,
and history and future trends.
Concepts of combinational logic:
Logic circuits implemented with electro-mechanical switches and transistors.
Circuits built from AND, OR, NAND, NOR, XOR gates to achieve logic functions,
e.g. majority voting, simple logical controls, adders.
Number systems, and binary arithmetic:
Binary, Decimal, Hexadecimal number representation, converting between,
applications and relative advantages. Addition and subtraction in binary,
range of n -bit numbers.
Analysis of logic circuits:
Truth Tables, Boolean Algebra, de Morgan’s theorem, Karnaugh Maps
Simplification and optimisation of circuits using these techniques.
LO2 Interpret sequential logic circuits
Sequential logic elements and circuits:
SR latch built from NAND or NOR gates
Clocked and edge-triggered bistables, D and JK types
Simple sequential circuits, including shift registers and counters
Timing Diagrams.
Memory technologies:
Memory terminology, overview of memory technologies including Static RAM,
Dynamic RAM and Flash memory cells
Relative advantages in terms of density, volatility and power consumption
Typical applications, e.g., in memory stick, mobile phone, laptop.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
153
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO3 Describe the technologies used to implement digital electronic circuits
Logic values represented by voltages:
The benefit of digital representation of information
The concept of logic input and output values and thresholds.
Digital technologies:
Introduction to discrete logic families, CMOS and TTL, relative advantages in
terms of speed, power consumption, density
Programmable logic, FPGAs, relative advantages and applications
Practical applications and the future of digital technologies.
LO4 Analyse a range of digital subsystems, hence establishing the building
blocks for larger systems
User interface:
Examples to include switches, light emitting diodes and simple displays
Digital subsystems:
Examples to be drawn from adders (half, full, n- bit), multiplexers and
demultiplexers, coders and decoders, counters applied as timers, shift registers
applied to serial data transmission, elements of the ALU (Arithmetic Logic Unit).
Emphasis on how these can be applied, and how they might fit into a larger
system.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
154
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Explain combinational logic circuits
P1 Explain the operation of M1 Analyse the operation of D1 Design combinational
combinational logic circuits, a combinational logic circuit logic circuits by making
making use of Truth Table, making good use of Truth best use of Truth Table,
Boolean Algebra and Table, Boolean Algebra and Boolean Algebra and
Karnaugh Map. Karnaugh Map. Karnaugh Map.
LO2 Interpret sequential logic circuits
P2 Interpret the operation M2 Analyse simple sequential D2 Design sequential logic
of a sequential logic circuit, logic circuits, making use of circuits, making use of
making use of Timing Timing Diagrams. Timing Diagrams.
Diagrams.
LO3 Describe the technologies used to implement digital
electronic circuits
P3 Describe the technologies M3 Apply techniques using lab D3 Apply techniques
used to implement electronic equipment to configure and using lab equipment
circuits. test simple digital circuits. to configure, test and
evaluate digital circuits,
comparing and evaluating
characteristics of different
technologies.
LO4 Analyse a range of digital subsystems, hence establishing
the building blocks for larger systems
P4 Analyse the principles of M4 Analyse a range of D4 Evaluate a range of
a range of different logic different logic subsystems in different logic subsystems,
subsystems. context of larger systems. comparing these with
other techniques or
subsystems available,
indicating the place they
might take in a larger
system.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
155
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Dally W.J. and Harting, R.C. (2012) Digital Design: A systems approach. Cambridge
University Press
Fadali M.S. and Visioli A. (2019) Digital Control Engineering. 3rd Ed. Academic Press
Floyd T.L. (2017) Digital Fundamentals . Global Edition. 11th Ed. Pearson
Hughes E., Hiley J., Brown K. and McKenzie-Smith, I. (2016)
Electrical and Electronic Technology . 12th Ed. Pearson
Kleitz W. (2013) Digital Electronics. 9th Ed. Pearson
Kolawole M. O. (2021) Electronics: from Classical to Quantum. 1st Ed. CRC Press.
Mano M. (2016) Digital Logic and Computer Design Paperback. 4th Ed. Pearson.
Mazumder P. and Ebong i.e. (2023) Lectures on Digital Design Principles. 1st Ed.
River Publishers
Plonus M. (2020) Electronics and Communications for Scientists and Engineers .
2nd Ed. Butterworth-Heinemann
Twomey J. (2023) Applied Embedded Electronics. O’Reilly Media, Inc.
Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
Electronics
Electronic Letters
e-Prime − Advances in Electrical Engineering, Electronics and Energy
IEEE Digital Circuits and Systems
IET Computers and Digital Techniques
International Journal of Digital Electronics
International Journal of Electronics
International Journal of Electronics and Communications
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
156
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4019: Electrical and Electronic Principles
Unit 4022: Electronic Circuits and Devices
Unit 5019: Further Electrical, Electronic and Digital Principles.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
157
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025