Unit 4021: Electrical Machines
Unit Code: M/651/0740
Level: 4
Credits: 15
Introduction
Electrical machines are used to convert electrical energy to and from mechanical
energy. These are found in manufacturing, transport, consumer appliances, medical
and other sectors. People will come across them every day in their home and at work.
Electric machines are bidirectional electromechanical energy conversion devices that
can be looked in two ways; as a motor which converts electrical energy to mechanical
energy; or as a generator which converts mechanical energy to electrical energy.
Transducers and actuators are also energy converters and can be found in a wide
range of industrial and domestic applications.
This unit introduces students to the construction, modelling and characteristics of a
range of electromagnetic machines and their practical application.. Among the topics
included in this unit are: principles underlying the operation and construction of
brushed DC, induction, and synchronous machines (motors and generators),
electromagnetic transducers and actuators; and operating characteristics of electrical
machines such as voltage, current, speed, torque, power rating, electromagnetic
interference (EMI) and efficiency.
On successful completion of this unit, students will be able to gain knowledge and
understanding of the operating characteristics of different types of electrical
machines and their practical applications in the industry.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
158
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Investigate the different types and operation of electrical machines
LO2 Explore the operation and the various starting methods of induction machines
LO3 Explore the operation and the various starting methods of synchronous
machines
LO4 Analyse the operating characteristics, construction and applications of
electromagnetic transducers and actuators.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
159
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Investigate the different types and operation of electrical machines
Constructional features:
Construction, application and characteristics and operation of machine types
such as: DC brushed, single phase induction, three phase induction, universal,
types of synchronous (BLDC/BLAC, wound rotor)
Stator, rotor, windings, commutator/slip rings, bearings, case, cooling.
Typical applications of a range of electrical machines (generators/motors),
possible modes of operation (torque, speed, position), and how they are chosen
for a specific application (based on key performance parameters: torque-speed
characteristic, losses, efficiency, size, cost, etc.).
Brushed and brushless DC machines:
Brushed versus brushless; advancements and case studies.
Brushed DC machine equivalent circuit model, analysis of the circuit,
testing/characterising.
LO2 Explore the operation and the various starting methods of induction
machines.
Methods and applications:
Characteristics and testing (characterisation) of induction machines (locked rotor
and no-load tests)
Equivalent circuit model of one phase with magnetising branch approximation.
Starting methods
Direct On-Line (DOL)
Star/Delta
Variable Frequency Drives (VFD)
Operation, key characteristics, and parameters:
Voltages, power, speed, torque, inertia, EMI, efficiency, and safety
(including health and safety policies, procedures and regulations,
compliance, risk assessment process and procedures)
Protection devices.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
160
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO3 Explore the operation and the various starting methods of synchronous
machines
Operation and characteristics of synchronous machines:
Characteristics and testing of synchronous machines (too much load can cause
them to lose sync and torque)
Focus on two types: Permanent Magnet Synchronous Machines (PMSM –
Brushless AC) and the wound rotor for larger applications (grid power
generation)
Starting methods (Closed loop control of PMSM with a VFD)
Practical applications
Equivalent circuit model
Voltages, power, speed, torque, inertia, EMI, efficiency
Cooling and protection.
LO4 Analyse the operating characteristics, construction and applications of
electromagnetic transducers and actuators.
Operating characteristics:
Construction, application, characteristics and testing of electromagnetic
transducers and actuators
Transducer types (active, passive, sensor), actuator types (solenoids, linear,
rotary including stepper motors)
Practical applications
Voltage and current requirements, hysteresis, and speed of operation.
Torque/force
Insulation Protection (IP) rating
Contact types
Back Electromotive Force (EMF), EMI and efficiency.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
161
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Investigate the different types and operation of electrical
machines.
P1 Examine the types of M1 Illustrate the operation D1 Assess the
electrical machine used in of the brushed DC machine, appropriateness of
industry. considering the equivalent different types of electrical
circuit. machine for an actual
P2 Discuss suitable
operational requirement.
applications for electrical
machines in industry.
P3 Investigate key
parameters of a brushed
DC machine.
LO2 Explore the operation and the various starting methods of
induction machines
P4 Explore the operating M2 Demonstrate the D2 Critically evaluate the
principles of the three-phase characterisation of the three- efficiency of available
induction machine. phase induction machine, induction machines and
considering the equivalent make a recommendation
P5 Analyse the different
circuit. for a specific operational
methods of starting three-
requirement.
and single-phase induction
machines.
LO3 Explore the operation and the various starting methods of
synchronous machines
P6 Explain the operating M3 Justify the use of a wound- D3 Assess the
principles of a permanent rotor synchronous machine in performance and
magnet synchronous a specific application. efficiency of permanent-
machine. magnet synchronous
machines and make a
P7 Explore a synchronous
recommendation for
machine for a specific
a specific operational
application, considering their
requirement.
operating characteristics.
LO4 Analyse the operating characteristics, construction and
applications of electromagnetic transducers and actuators
P8 Analyse the operation, M4 Justify the selection of D4 Critically analyse the
types and uses of suitable transducers for practical application of
electromotive transducers specific industrial transducers and actuators
and actuators, by examining applications. in an industrial situation
features that support their and make
suitability for specific recommendations to
applications. improve their operating
effectiveness.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
162
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Boldea I. and Tutelea L.N. (2021) Electrical Machines: Steady State and Performance with
MATLAB . 2nd Ed. CRC Press
Boldea I. and Tutelea L.N. (2021) Electrical Machines: Two Volume Set. 2nd Ed. CRC Press
Chapman S.J. (2011) Electric Machinery Fundamentals . 5th Ed. McGraw-Hill
De Silva, C.W. (2015) Sensors and Actuators: Engineering System Instrumentation .
2nd Ed. CRC Press
Fucha E.F. and Masoum M.A.S. (2023) Power Quality in Power Systems, Electrical
Machines, and Power-Electronic Drives . 3rd Ed. Academic Press
Gibbons P.(Editor) (2023) Electrical Machines: Analysis and Applications (Hardback).
Clanrye International.
Gieras J.F. (2020) Electrical Machines: Fundamentals of Electromechanical Energy
Conversion . CRC Press
Guru B.S. and Hiziroglu H.R. (2001) Electric Machinery and Transformers . 3rd Ed.
Oxford university Press
Hughes, A. (2013) Electric Motors and Drives: Fundamentals, Types and Applications .
4th Ed. Newnes
Krishnan R. (2001) Electric Motor Drives: Modeling, Analysis, and Control Paperback –
Illustrated. Pearson.
Alassouli H.M. (2021) Lecture Notes for Electrical Machines Course . Self-published.
Sarma M.S. (1997) Electrical Machines: Steady-State Theory and Dynamic Performance .
2nd Ed. CL Engineering
Sehgal R., Gupta N., Tomar A., Sharma M.D. and Kumaran V. (2022) Smart Electrical
and Mechanical Systems. 1st Ed. Academic Press
Wildi T. (2014) Electrical Machines, Drives and Power Systems . 6th Ed. Pearson
New International Edition.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
163
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
CES Transactions on Electrical Machines and Systems
Electrical Machines and Control 1007-449X
Electrical machines and Electromechanics
Electrical Machines & Power Systems
International Journal of Electrical Machines & Drives
International Journal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems
Journal of Electrical Engineering & Technology
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 5010: Further Electrical Machines and Drives.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
164
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025