Unit 4022: Electronic Circuits and
Devices
Unit Code: T/651/0742
Level: 4
Credits: 15
Introduction
Electronics is pervasive and impacts various aspects of modern day living and the
society as a whole. Many industries rely upon the use of electronics, thereby creating
opportunities in industrial applications and research.
This unit introduces students the operational characteristics of amplifier circuits, the
types, and effects of feedback on a circuit performance, and the operation, application
of oscillators. They will also be introduced to semiconductor devices and circuits, the
use of electronics manufacturers’ data to analyse the performance of circuits and
devices, the application of testing procedures, and use the findings of the tests to
evaluate their operation.
Among the topics included in this unit are: power amplifiers, class A, B and AB;
operational amplifiers, inverting, non-inverting, differential, summing, integrator,
differentiator; types such as open, closed, positive and negative feedback; frequency,
stability, frequency drift, distortion, amplitude, wave shapes and testing procedures.
On successful completion of this unit students will be able to learn about the
operational characteristics of amplifier circuits, the types and effects of feedback
on an amplifier’s performance, the operation and application of oscillators and
application of testing procedures to electronic devices and circuits.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
165
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Determine the operational characteristics of amplifier circuits
LO2 Investigate the types and effects of feedback on an amplifier’s performance
LO3 Examine the operation and application of oscillators
LO4 Apply testing procedures to electronic devices and circuits.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
166
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Determine the operational characteristics of amplifier circuits
Operational characteristics:
Power amplifiers: class A, B and AB
Operational amplifiers: inverting, non-inverting, differential, summing, integrator,
differentiator, comparator, instrumentation, Schmitt trigger, active filters
Gain, bandwidth, frequency response, input, and output impedance
Distortion and noise.
Electronic circuits and semiconductors:
Integrated use of semiconductors and electronic circuits; diodes and transistors,
diode applications, Zener diode; operational characteristics.
LO2 Investigate the types and effects of feedback on an amplifier’s performance
Types and effects:
Types including open, closed, positive and negative feedback
Effect of feedback on gain, bandwidth, distortion, noise, stability, input,
and output impedance
The concept of virtual ground.
LO3 Examine the operation and application of oscillators
Operation and application:
Types of oscillators such as Wien bridge, Twin-T, R-C ladder, L-C coupled,
transistor, operational amplifier, crystal
Frequency, stability, frequency drift, distortion, amplitude, and wave shapes.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
167
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO4 Apply testing procedures to electronic devices and circuits
Testing procedures:
Measuring performance, using practical results and computer simulations
Voltage gain, current, bandwidth, frequency response, output power, input,
and output impedance
Distortion and noise.
Devices to test:
Introduction of concepts, device usage and testing
Semiconductors
Integrated circuits
Amplifiers
Oscillators
Filters
Power supplies
Integrated circuit (IC) voltage regulators
Combined analogue and digital IC’s.
Component manufacturer’s data:
Specifications, manuals, and circuit diagrams.
Use of testing equipment:
Meters, probes, and oscilloscopes
Signal generators and signal analysers, logic analysers
Virtual test equipment (simulation software)
Effective use of tools and techniques when securely operating and testing
systems and components (e.g., networks and devices).
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
168
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Determine the operational characteristics of amplifier
circuits
P1 Describe the types of M1 Explain the results D1 Critically review the
amplifiers available using obtained from applying results obtained from the
their typical circuits. practical tests on an application of practical
amplifier’s performance. and simulated tests on
P2 Determine different
amplifier circuits studied.
performance characteristics
of types of operational
amplifier.
LO2 Investigate the types and effects of feedback on an
amplifier’s performance
P3 Investigate the effect of M2 Perform practical tests to D2 Analyse the effect of
different types of feedback show the effect of feedback feedback on an amplifier’s
on the operational amplifier’s on an amplifier’s performance using
performance. performance. practical and simulated
tests.
P4 For a given practical
scenario, describe how
circuits employ feedback.
LO3 Examine the operation and application of oscillators
P5 Examine types of available M3 Assess the performance D3 Analyse the results
oscillators and their characteristics of different obtained from applying
applications. type of oscillators. practical and simulated
tests to oscillators studied.
LO4 Apply testing procedures to electronic devices and circuits
P6 Show use of M4 Perform tests on D4 Critically review the
manufacturer’s data sheets in electronic devices and circuits, results obtained from
selecting electronic devices recording results and applying practical and
for a given context. recommending appropriate simulated tests to devices
action. and circuits studied.
P7 Apply information derived
from manufacturer’s data
when testing electronic
devices and circuits.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
169
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Bird Jo. (2022) Bird’s Electrical Circuit Theory and Technology . 7th Ed. Routledge
Boylestad R.L. and Nashelsky L. (2013) Electronic Devices and Circuit Theory .
11th Ed. Pearson
Floyd T.L. and Buchla D. (2021) Electronics Fundamentals: Conventional Current .
10th Ed. Pearson
Horowitz P. and Hill W. (2015) The Art of Electronics . 3rd Ed. Cambridge University Press
Makarov S., Ludwig R. and Bitar S.J. (2019) Practical Electric Engineering. 2nd Ed.
Springer.
Storey N. (2017) ELECTRONICS A Systems Approach. 6th Ed. Pearson
Yawale S. and Yawale S. (2022) Operational Amplifier: Theory and Experiment.
1st Ed. Springer.
Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
Electronic Devices and Networking Journal
Electronic Devices Articles from Across Nature Portfolio
IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices
Microelectronics Journal
Power Electronic Devices and Components
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4019: Electrical and Electronic Principles
Unit 5019: Further Electrical, Electronic and Digital Principles
Unit 5014: Analogue Electronic Systems.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
170
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025