Unit 4023: Computer Aided Design and
Manufacture (CAD/CAM)
Unit Code: A/651/0744
Level: 4
Credits: 15
Introduction
The capacity to quickly produce finished components from a software model is now
essential in the competitive world of manufacturing. Businesses now invest heavily in
Computer Aided Design (CAD) software, Computer Aided Manufacture (CAM) software
and Computer Numerical Control (CNC) machines (Additive Manufacture (AM)) and
subtractive machining) to facilitate this, thus reducing product lead times. CAD gives
design engineers the platform to creatively model components that meet the specific
needs of the consumer. When these models are combined with CAM software,
manufacturing is made a reality.
This unit introduces students to all the stages of the CAD/CAM process and to
the process of modelling components using CAD software specifically suitable
for transferring to CAM software. Among the topics included in this unit are:
programming methods, component set-up, tooling, solid modelling, geometry
manipulation, component drawing, importing solid model, manufacturing simulation,
data transfer, CNC machine types, and inspections.
On successful completion of this unit students will be able to learn about the
key principles of manufacturing using a CAD/CAM system; 3D solid models of a
component suitable for transfer into a CAM system; CAM software to generate
manufacturing simulations of a component; and designing a dimensionally
accurate component on a CNC machine or AKM system using a CAD/CAM system.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
171
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Describe the key principles of manufacturing using a CAD/CAM system
LO2 Prepare 3D solid models of a component suitable for transfer into a
CAM system
LO3 Use CAM software to generate manufacturing simulations of a component
LO4 Produce a dimensionally accurate component on a CNC/AM machine using
a CAD/CAM system.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
172
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Describe the key principles of manufacturing using a CAD/CAM system
Hardware:
CAD workstation, printers, USB flash drives and network cables.
Software:
Operating systems, hard disk requirements, processor, CAD software
e.g., SolidWorks, Autodesk Inventor, CATIA, Creo, Siemens NX; CAM software
e.g., FeatureCam, Edgecam, GibbsCAM, SolidCAM, Cura.
Inputs:
CAD model, material specifications, tooling data, spindle speeds and feed rate
data calculations, STL file, sliced 3D models (infill, wall thicknesses, material,
speeds).
Outputs:
CAM files (eg .stp file), program code (gcode) and coordinates, manufacturing
sequences, tooling requirements, auxiliary data.
Programming methods:
CAD/CAM, manual programming, conversational programming.
Component set-up:
Zero datum setting, tool set-up and offsets, axis of movements.
Work-holding:
Machine vice, chuck, fixtures, clamping, jigs.
Tooling:
Milling cutters, lathe tools, drills, specialist tooling, tool holders, tool turrets
and carousels.
Overview of emerging technologies:
Industry case studies (e.g., Additive Manufacturing/3D printing).
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
173
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO2 Prepare 3D solid models of a component suitable for transfer into a CAM
system
Solid modelling:
Sketch commands, extrude, cut, holes, sweep, revolve, shell, fillet, chamfer. Use
lines, arcs, points, construction planes to generate surface forms. Assign material
to review properties of solid models e.g., mass, centre of gravity, surface area.
Geometry manipulation:
Mirror, drag, rotate, copy, array, offset. Model tree manipulation and reordering.
Component/Assembly drawing:
Set-up template, orthographic and multi-view drawings, including sections,
detail and exploded views, scale, dimensions, drawing from 3D model data.
Implementation of BS8888 (UK’s national framework standard for engineering
drawings and geometrical tolerancing)
Attributes e.g., Notes, Bill of Materials (BOM), material, reference points,
tolerances, finish, nomenclature (naming convention, e.g. part numbering).
LO3 Use CAM software to generate manufacturing simulations of a component
Import solid model:
Set-up, model feature and geometry identification, stock size, material.
Manufacturing simulation:
Operations e.g., roughing and finishing, pockets, slots, profiling, holes, tool and
work change positions, tool sizes and IDs, speeds and feeds, cutter path
simulations, program editing
CADCAM used in production of Additive Manufacturing (3D Printing)
Use of Industry 4.0 and CAD/CAM: connectivity, advanced toolpaths, testing;
integration of systems through simulation.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
174
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO4 Produce a dimensionally accurate component on a CNC/AM machine using
a CAD/CAM system
CNC machine types:
Machining centres, turning centres, hybrid machining (e.g. Mazak, HAAS, Meltio),
Robotic arm/gantry routers, MCUs e.g., Fanuc, Siemens, and Heidenheim.
AM machine types:
FDM, SLS, SLM, SLA (VP), DED, L-PBF, EB-PBF.
Data transfer:
Structured data between CAD and CAM software e.g., datum position and model
orientation; file types e.g., SLDPRT, parasolid, STL, IGES, STEP, DXF, gcode;
transfer to CNC machine e.g., network, USB, Ethernet, Dashboard UI.
Inspection:
Manual inspection e.g., using Micrometer, Vernier gauges, bore micrometres,
thread gauge, radius guage, go-no-go gauge.
Automated inspection e.g., co-ordinate measuring machine (CMM), stages of
inspection throughout manufacturing process, Machine Vision inspection,
metrology level 3D scanner.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
175
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Describe the key principles of manufacturing using a
CAD/CAM system
P1 Describe the hardware M1 Analyse the suitability of D1 Critically evaluate,
and software elements of a different programming using illustrative examples,
typical CAD/CAM system. methods of CNC/AM the impact of different
machines. machining conditions
P2 Describe, with examples,
and specifications
the inputs and outputs of the
on component
CAD/CAM process.
manufacturing.
P3 Explain the different
methods of component set-
up, work-holding/build plate
adhesion and tooling/nozzle
type/configuration available
on CNC/AM machines.
LO2 Prepare 3D solid models of a component suitable for
transfer into a CAM system
P4 Prepare a CAD solid model M2 Assess the importance D2 Critically evaluate the
of a component or multi-part of using different geometry effectiveness of using a
assembly to be manufactured manipulation methods for CAD/CAM system and
on a computer numerically efficient model production. solid modelling to
controlled systems. manufacture components.
M3 Analyse accuracy aspects
P5 Design a working drawing of drawing to aid inspection.
of a component/assembly
containing specific
manufacturing detail.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
176
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Pass Merit Distinction
LO3 Use CAM software to generate manufacturing simulations
of a component
P6 Use CAM software to M4 Using CAM software, D3 Analyse the effect
generate a geometrically generate cutter tool path of applying different
accurate CAD solid model simulations. manufacturing techniques
of a component. and modifications to
M5 Review sliced file/toolpath,
achieve an optimised
part orientation, infill,
production time.
supports, wall thickness,
build plate adhesion.
LO4 Produce a dimensionally accurate component on a
CNC/AM machine using a CAD/CAM system
P7 Produce a part program M6 Compare different D4 Critically analyse, giving
for a component using CAM methods of component illustrative examples, the
software and transfer the inspection used in different methods of data
part program to a CNC/AM manufacturing. transfer through a
machine and manufacture CAD/CAM system.
a component.
P8 Describe the structural
elements of a CNC Machining
Centre or 3D Printer.
P9 Review a component
manufactured on a CNC/
AM machine to verify its
accuracy.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
177
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Bethune J.D. (2019) Engineering Design Graphics with Autodesk Inventor 2020 .
1st Ed. Pearson.
Bi Z. and Wang X. (2020) Computer Aided Design and Manufacturing . Wiley.
BS 8888 (2017) Technical product documentation and specification .
Chang K.H. (2021) Virtual Machining Using CAMWorks 2021 − CAMWorks as a
SOLIDWORKS Module . 1st Ed. SDC Publications.
Chitale A.K. and Gupta R.C. (2023) Product design and manufacturing .
PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd.
Confalone G.C., Smits J. and Kinnare T. (2023) 3D Scanning for Advanced Manufacturing,
Design, and Construction . Wiley.
Groover M.P. (2020) Fundamentals of modern manufacturing: materials, processes,
and systems . John Wiley & Sons.
Metwalli S.M. (2021) Machine Design with CAD and Optimization . Wiley.
Omura G. and Benton B.C. (2014) Mastering AutoCAD 2015 and AutoCAD
LT 2015 Essentials . Autodesk Official Press
Pitroda H. P (2019) Computer Aided Design: Textbook and Practice book .
Walnut publication
Sarkar J., (2014). Computer aided design: a conceptual approach . CRC Press.
Shih R.H. (2024) Principles and Practice: An Integrated Approach to Engineering Graphics
and AutoCAD 2024 . 1st Ed. SDC Publications.
Simmons C.H., Dennis E. and Maguire N.P. (2020) Manual of Engineering Drawing-
British and International Standards. 5th Ed. Butterworth-Heinemann.
Stark J. (2021) What Every Engineer Should Know about Practical CAD/CAM Applications.
CRC Press.
Zeus Precision Charts Ltd. (2007) Zeus Precision Data Charts and Reference Tables for
Drawing Office, Toolroom & Workshop . Metric Revision.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
178
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Journals:
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
CAD Journal – CAD and Applications
Computer-Aided Design
Computer-Aided Design and Applications
International journal of Computer Integrated manufacturing
International Journal of CAD/CAM
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4001: Engineering Design
Unit 4027: CAD for maintenance Engineers
Unit 4034: Computer Aided Design (CAD) for Engineering
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
179
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025