Unit 4024: Electro, Pneumatic and
Hydraulic Systems
Unit Code: F/651/0746
Level: 4
Credits: 15
Introduction
Hydraulics and pneumatics incorporate the importance of fluid power theory in
modern industry. This is the technology that deals with the generation, control, and
movement of mechanical elements or systems with the use of pressurised fluids in
a confined system. In respect of hydraulics and pneumatics, both liquids and gases
are considered fluids. Oil hydraulics employs pressurised liquid petroleum oils and
synthetic oils, whilst pneumatic systems employ an everyday recognisable process
of releasing compressed air to the atmosphere after performing the work.
The aim of this module is to develop students’ knowledge and appreciation of the
applications of fluid power systems in modern industry. Students will investigate and
design pneumatic, hydraulic, electro-pneumatic and electro-hydraulic systems. This
unit offers the opportunity for students to examine the characteristics of fluid power
components and evaluate work-related practices and applications of these systems.
On successful completion of this unit students will be able to learn about applications
of hydraulic and pneumatic systems in the production industry, fundamental
principles and practical techniques for obtaining solutions to problems, real-life
applications of pneumatic and hydraulic systems, and the importance of structured
maintenance techniques.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
180
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Calculate the parameters of pneumatic and hydraulic systems
LO2 Illustrate the notation and symbols of pneumatic and hydraulic components
LO3 Examine the applications of pneumatic and hydraulic systems
LO4 Investigate the maintenance of pneumatic and hydraulic systems.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
181
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Calculate the parameters of pneumatic and hydraulic systems
Pneumatic and hydraulic theory:
Combined and ideal gas laws: Boyle’s Law, Charles’ Law and Gay-Lussac’s Law
Fluid flow, calculation of pressure and velocity using Bernoulli’s Equation for
Newtonian fluids
System performance, volumetric operational and isothermal efficiency
Dynamic and Kinematic Viscosity
Methods of measuring viscosity including Stokes’ Law
Navier Stokes Equations.
LO2 Illustrate the notation and symbols of pneumatic and hydraulic
components
Performance of hydraulic and pneumatic components:
The use and importance of International Standards, including relative symbols
and devices
Fluid power diagrams
Pneumatic and hydraulic critical equipment and their purpose
Circuit diagrams, component interaction and purpose
Dynamics of modern system use.
LO3 Examine the applications of pneumatic and hydraulic systems
System applications:
Calculation of appropriate capacities and specifications
Applied functions of control elements
Design and testing of hydraulic and pneumatic systems
Fluid power in real-life examples
Valued component choice
Alternative actuating systems.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
182
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO4 Investigate the maintenance of pneumatic and hydraulic systems
Efficiency of systems:
Efficient maintenance: accurate records and procedures to ensure efficiency
Functional inspection, modern techniques to limit production problems,
quality control
Testing, efficient procedures to enable component longevity, recommendations
Fault finding, diagnostic techniques, effects of malfunctions, rectification of faults
Use relevant problem-solving tools where applicable e.g root cause analysis
(RCA), process failure modes effects analysis (PFMEA), fishbone, practical
problem solving (PPS) and advanced product quality planning (APQP)
Job market and opportunities for efficiency and maintenance of pneumatic
and hydraulic systems.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
183
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Calculate the parameters of pneumatic and hydraulic
systems
P1 Calculate the change in M1 Using Bernoulli’s Equation, D1 Develop a presentation
volume and pressure in calculate values at stationary analysing fluid viscosity
pneumatic systems. incompressible flow. using Stokes’ law and
validate how this relates
P2 Determine the change in
to Navier–Stokes
volume and pressure in
equations.
hydraulic systems.
LO2 Illustrate the notation and symbols of pneumatic and
hydraulic components
P3 Show the purpose of M2 Assess the different D2 Stating any
components on a given factors that impact on assumptions, compare the
diagram. actuator choice for a given applications of practical
application. hydraulic and pneumatic
P4 Explain the use of logic
systems.
functions used within circuits.
P5 Illustrate the use of
advanced functions and their
effect on circuit performance.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
184
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Pass Merit Distinction
LO3 Examine the applications of pneumatic and hydraulic
systems
P6 Examine the design M3 Justify the measures taken D3 Propose the design
and function of a hydraulic or to improve circuit design in modifications that
pneumatic system employed respect of performance. can be introduced
in a modern production to improve the
environment. functionality and
maintenance of
P7 Define the purpose and
pneumatic and hydraulic
function of electrical control
systems without creating
elements in a given hydraulic
reliability issues.
or pneumatic system.
LO4 Investigate the maintenance of pneumatic and hydraulic
systems
P8 Recognise system faults M4 Compare construction and D4 Evaluate the
and potential hazards in operation of hydraulic and importance of
pneumatic and hydraulic pneumatic systems with maintenance, inspection,
systems. regards to legislation and testing and fault-finding in
safety issues. respect of improved
P9 Investigate procedures to
system performance.
ensure efficient maintenance
and operation of pneumatic
and hydraulic systems.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
185
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Esposito A. (2013) Fluid Power with Applications , 7th Ed. Pearson
Parr E. A. (2011) Hydraulics and Pneumatics – A Technician’s and Engineer’s Guide .
3rd Ed. Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Mills D. (2015) Pneumatic Conveying Design Guide . 3rd Ed. Elsevier.
Turner I.C. (2021) Engineering applications of pneumatics and hydraulic s. Routledge.
Salam M.A. (2022) Fundamentals of Pneumatics and Hydraulics . Springer.
Vacca A. and Franzoni G. (2021) Hydraulic fluid power: fundamentals, applications,
and circuit design . John Wiley & Sons.
Stryczek J. and Warzyńska U. (Editors) (2020) Advances in Hydraulic and Pneumatic
Drives and Control 2020 . Springer Nature.
Parambath J. (2020) Electro-Pneumatics and Automation .
Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
Experiments in Fluids
International Journal of Fluid Power
Journal of Hydraulic Engineering
Journal of Hydraulic Research
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4011: Fluid Mechanics
Unit 5023: Thermofluids.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
186
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025