Unit 4025: Operations and Plant
Management
Unit Code: H/651/0747
Level: 4
Credits: 15
Introduction
The challenges of modern manufacturing industries require today’s operations
engineers to adopt a multi-skilled methodology when dealing with the array of
complex engineering problems they are faced with. Long gone are the days of ‘pure’
mechanical or electrical maintenance staff; operations engineers may well specialise
within one discipline, but they must have the knowledge and ability to safely tackle
problems that could encompass many varied engineering fields if they are to keep
the wheels of industry in motion.
The underlying aims of this unit are to develop the students’ knowledge of the
engineering fundamentals that augment the design and operation of plant
engineering systems, and to furnish them with the tools and techniques to
maintain the ever more technological equipment.
The students are introduced to the concept of thermodynamic systems and their
properties in the first learning outcome; this will provide a platform for the topic of
heat transfer in industrial applications (as covered in learning outcome four) and
underpin their future studies in subsequent units. The second learning outcome
examines common mechanical power transmission system elements found in
numerous production/manufacturing environments, whilst the third learning
outcome investigates fundamental static and dynamic fluid systems.
On completion of this unit students will be able to learn about the fundaments that
underpin the operation of the systems they deal with on a daily basis and apply these
fundamentals to the successful maintenance of the systems.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
187
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Analyse fundamental thermodynamic systems and their properties
LO2 Investigate power transmission systems
LO3 Determine the parameters of static and dynamic fluid systems
LO4 Examine the principles of heat transfer in industrial applications.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
188
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Analyse fundamental thermodynamic systems and their properties
Fundamental system:
Forms of energy and basic definitions
Definitions of systems (open and closed, isolated) and surroundings
First and second laws of thermodynamics
The gas laws: Charles’ Law, Boyle’s Law, general gas law and the Characteristic
Gas Equation
The importance and applications of pressure/volume diagrams and the concept
of work done
Polytropic processes: constant pressure, constant volume, adiabatic and
isothermal processes
Use problem solving tools for analysis where relevant – for example, as Root
Cause Analysis (RCA) Process Failure Modes Effects Analysis (PFMEA), Fishbone,
Practical Problem Solving (PPS) and Advanced Product Quality Planning (APQP)
Relate knowledge and skills on thermodynamics systems to operations and plant
management through real-world industry scenarios.
LO2 Investigate power transmission systems
Power transmission:
Flat and v-section belts drives: maximum power and initial tension requirements
Types of power transmissions: mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic, electrical
Constant wear and constant pressure theories
Gear trains: simple and compound gear trains; determination of velocity ratio;
torque and power
Friction clutches: flat, single, and multi-plate clutches; maximum power
transmitted
Conical clutches: maximum power transmitted
Relate knowledge and skills on power transmission systems to operations and
plant management through real-world industry scenarios.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
189
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO3 Determine the parameters of static and dynamic fluid systems
Fluid flow theory:
Continuity equations
Application of Bernoulli’s Equation
Reynolds number; turbulent and laminar flow
Measuring devices for fluids: flow, viscosity, and pressure
Determination of head loss in pipes by D’Arcy’s formula, use of Moody diagrams
Immersed surfaces: centre of pressure, use of parallel axis theorem for
immersed surfaces
Hydrostatic pressure and thrust on immersed surfaces
Relate knowledge and skills on fluid systems to operations and plant
management through real-world industry scenarios.
LO4 Examine the principles of heat transfer in industrial applications
Heat transfer:
Modes of transmission of heat: conduction, convection, and radiation
Heat transfer through composite walls; use of U and k values;
example case studies
Recuperator, regenerator, and evaporative heat exchangers
Application of formulae to heat exchangers
Heat losses in thick and thin-walled pipes: optimum lagging thickness.
Case studies:
Example industry applications (e.g., applications relevant to management
of abnormal conditions, emergency management and recovery).
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
190
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Analyse fundamental thermodynamic systems and
their properties
P1 Examine the operation of M1 Discuss the index of D1 Illustrate the importance
thermodynamic systems compression in polytrophic of expressions for work done
and their properties. processes. in thermodynamic processes
by applying first principles.
P2 Explain the application of
the first law of
thermodynamics to
appropriate systems.
P3 Analyse the relationships
between system constants
for a perfect gas.
LO2 Investigate power transmission systems
P4 Calculate the maximum M2 Analyse the factors that D2 Critique the ‘constant
power which can be inform the design of an wear’ and ‘constant pressure’
transmitted by means industrial belt drive system. theories as applied to friction
of a belt. clutches.
P5 Calculate the maximum
power which can be
transmitted by means
of a friction clutch.
P6 Investigate the power
and torque transmitted
through gear trains.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
191
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Pass Merit Distinction
LO3 Determine the parameters of static and dynamic fluid
systems
P7 Determine the head M3 Explore turbulent and D3 Compare the practical
losses in pipeline flow. laminar flow in Newtonian application of three different
fluids. types of differential pressure
P8 Calculate the hydrostatic
measuring device.
pressure and thrust on an
immersed surface.
P9 Determine the centre of
pressure on an immersed
surface.
LO4 Examine the principles of heat transfer in industrial
applications
P10 Examine the heat M4 Explore heat losses D4 Differentiate between
transfer through composite through lagged and parallel and counter flow
walls. unlagged pipes. recuperator heat
exchangers.
P11 Apply heat transfer
formulae to heat
exchangers.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
192
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Badescu V., Lazaroiu G.C. and Barelli L. (Editors) (2019) Power Engineering −
Advances and Challenges Part B: Electrical Power. 1st Ed. CRC Press.
Berkshire F.H. (2021) Introductory Incompressible Fluid Mechanics Paperback .
Kindle Edition. Cambridge University Press.
Cachon G. and Terwiesch C. (2023) Operations Management. 3rd Edition. McGraw-Hill
Chowdhury T., Chakrabarti A. and Chanda C.K. (2021) Power Transmission System
Analysis Against Faults and Attacks. 1st Ed. CRC Press.
Dunn D. (2001) Fundamental Engineering Thermodynamics . Longman.
Eastop, T.D. and McConkey, A. (1996) Applied Thermodynamics for Engineering
Technologists . 5th Ed. Prentice Hall.
Hanlon R.T. (2020) Block by Block: The Historical and Theoretical Foundations of
Thermodynamics Paperback. Kindle Edition. OUP Oxford.
Ghojel J. (2023) Heat Transfer Basics: A Concise Approach to Problem Solving (Hardback).
Wiley.
lloyd E. (Editor) (2023) Handbook of Heat Transfer and Fluid Flow (Hardback).
Willford Press.
Massey B.S. and Ward-Smith J. (2011) Mechanics of Fluids . 9th Ed. Oxford: Spon Press.
Moran M. J., and Tsatsaronis G. (2017) ‘Engineering Thermodynamics’ .
In CRC Handbook Of Thermal Engineering (pp. 1-112). Abingdon: CRC Press.
Pokrovskii V.N. (2020) Thermodynamics of Complex Systems: Principles and applications −
IOP ebooks (Hardback). Institute of Physics Publishing.
Sarkar D. (2015). Thermal power plant: design and operation . Elsevier.
Stevenson W.J (2021) Operations Management . 14th Edition. McGraw-Hill.
Vera J.H. and Wilczek-Vera G. (2021) Classical Thermodynamics of Fluid Systems:
Principles and Applications (Paperback). CRC Press.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
193
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
IEEE Transactions on Power Systems
International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer
International Journal of Operations and Production Management
International Journal of Services and Operations Management
Journal of Operations Management
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4024: Electro, Pneumatic and Hydraulic Systems
Unit 4026: Electrical Systems and Fault Finding.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
194
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025