Unit 4026: Electrical Systems and Fault
Finding
Unit Code: K/651/0749
Level: 4
Credits: 15
Introduction
Electrical systems can be found in a very wide range of locations such as in
manufacturing facilities, airports, transport systems, shopping centres, hotels and
hospitals; people will come across them every day in their workplace and at home.
The system must take the electrical supply from the national grid, convert it to a
suitable voltage and then distribute it safely to the various system components
and uses such as electric motors, lighting circuits and environmental controls.
This unit introduces students to the characteristics and operational parameters of
a range of electrical system components that are used in a variety of applications;
and how to fault find when they go wrong.
On successful completion of this unit students will be able to follow electrical system
circuit diagrams, understand the operation of the various components that make up
the system and select the most suitable fault-finding technique. Therefore, students
will develop skills such as critical thinking, analysis, reasoning, interpretation, decision-
making, information literacy, information and communication technology literacy,
innovation, creativity, collaboration, and adaptability, which are crucial skills for
gaining employment and developing academic competence for higher education
progression.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
195
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Investigate the key constructional features and applications of electrical
systems, including identification and resolution of potential faults
LO2 Examine the types, applications, and common fault-finding methodologies of
electrical motors and generators
LO3 Analyse potential faults and fault diagnostics in the various types of lighting
circuits available in the industry by assessing their practical application
LO4 Discuss the operating characteristics of electrical safety components including
evaluation of their effectiveness through fault-finding techniques.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
196
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Investigate the key constructional features and applications of electrical
systems, including identification and resolution of potential faults
Electrical systems:
Purpose and types of electrical systems, role of electrical power distribution
systems, modern trends and diverse range of applications
Key elements of electrical distribution systems, such as transformers, circuit
breakers, protection devices, and wiring techniques. Constructional features of
the key elements, for example, transformers such as step up/down, isolating,
shell and core, windings, connections, efficiency
Common faults within these systems and the steps to troubleshoot and fix them.
Example scenarios include short-circuits, ground faults, and overloads.
Non-common and complex faults. Application of tools such as multimeters,
circuit testers, and thermal imagers in fault finding could also be covered.
Fault finding, location and signal tracing techniques/methodologies:
Input-to-output, output-to-input, half-split method, symptom to cause fault,
unit substitution, visual examination, top-down approach, module and
component isolation.
Use of fault-finding aids:
Risk assessment, test plans, functional charts, diagrams, trouble-shooting charts,
component data sheets, operation and maintenance manuals, software-based
records and data; fault/repair reporting, mean time between failure (MTBF)
figures.
LO2 Examine the types, applications, and common fault-finding methodologies
of electrical motors and generators
Types, methodologies, and applications of electrical motors and generators:
Different types of motors and generators such as DC motors, AC motors,
synchronous generators, and induction generators
Current and future uses and industrial applications
Fault finding – typical issues such as winding failures, mechanical failures,
control circuit faults; overcurrent, overvoltage and overload
Fault finding/mitigation methodologies for diagnosis, repair, and future
maintenance.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
197
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO3 Analyse potential faults and fault diagnostics in various types of lighting
circuits available in the industry by assessing their practical application
Lighting circuits, applications and fault finding:
Types of lighting circuits such as series and parallel
Combination circuits analysis and use in residential and industry contexts
Lighting design considerations − quality of light, control of glare, luminance,
internal/external lighting for visual tasks, emergency lighting
Construction and practical applications
Typical faults including circuit overload, faulty switches, wiring issues;
fault diagnostics
Safety requirements for use in hazardous zones.
LO4 Discuss the operating characteristics of electrical safety components
including evaluation of their effectiveness through fault-finding techniques
Electrical safety components and applications:
Various electrical safety components such as circuit breakers, ground fault
interrupters, surge protectors, and safety switches
Operating principles, uses and common malfunctions of electrical safety
components
Selection of appropriate component types for a selection of industry scenarios
Role of safety components in protecting equipment and personnel
Techniques to test effectiveness and reliability of safety components
(e.g., using an insulation resistance tester)
Electrical safety standards:
Approved codes of practice
Safety first culture and active engagement with health and safety policies
and procedures, regulations and compliance, risk assessment process and
procedures.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
198
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Investigate the key constructional features and
applications of electrical systems, including identification and
resolution of potential faults
P1 Investigate constructional M1 Analyse constructional D1 Present modern trends
features of an electrical features of multiple in electrical systems, their
distribution system, electrical systems, their constructional features
demonstrating the ability to applications, with and applications across
detect and resolve common demonstrable proficiency in various industries, with
faults, for a given scenario. identifying, diagnosing, and demonstrable knowledge
resolving common and less of effective strategies for
common faults. fault prevention and
system optimisation.
LO2 Examine the types, applications, and common fault-
finding methodologies of electrical motors and generators.
P2 Examine the types and M2 Analyse efficiency D2 Perform an
applications of electrical aspects of electrical motors examination of a wide
motors and generators, and generators in a given range of modern electrical
and relevant fault-finding application scenario with motors and generators
methodologies. focus on fault-finding and and their usage in large
fault mitigation. applications across diverse
industries, with a focus
on fault-finding
methodologies to
diagnose and resolve
complex faults.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
199
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Pass Merit Distinction
LO3 Analyse potential faults and fault diagnostics in the
various types of lighting circuits available in the industry by
assessing their practical application
P3 Analyse two types of M3 Conduct a detailed D3 Evaluate a broad
lighting circuits used in the analysis of various types spectrum of modern
industry including diagnosis of lighting circuits, their lighting circuits in practical
of common faults found in a practical industry application scenarios, with
specific practical application. applications, including a focus on diagnosing,
diagnosis of common and troubleshooting and
less common faults. proposing solutions for a
range of serious faults.
LO4 Discuss the operating characteristics of electrical safety
components including evaluation of their effectiveness
through fault-finding techniques
P4 Discuss the operating M4 Analyse the operating D4 Critically analyse the
characteristics of commonly characteristics of a selection operating characteristics
used electrical safety of electrical safety of modern electrical safety
components. components and fault- components, using
finding scenarios in an sophisticated fault-finding
P5, Demonstrating the ability
industrial situation. techniques, with strategies
to evaluate the effectiveness of
for improving safety
electrical components using
component performance
simple fault-finding
and reliability.
techniques.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
200
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Boss M.J. and Norris G.M. (2015) Electrical Safety: Systems, Sustainability, and
Stewardship . 1st Ed. CRC Press.
Cadena R. (2021) Electricity for the Entertainment Electrician & Technician . 3rd Ed.
Routledge.
Fuchs E.F. and Masoum M.A.S. (2023) Power Quality in Power Systems, Electrical
Machines, and Power-Electronic Drives (Paperback). Elsevier Science Publishing Co Inc.
Gill P. (2016) Electrical Power Equipment Maintenance and Testing . 2nd Ed. CRC Press.
Gonen T. (2014) Electric Power Distribution Engineering . 3rd Ed. CRC Press.
Guru B.S. and Hiziroglu H.R. (2001) Electric Machinery and Transformers. 3rd Ed.
Oxford University Press.
Herman S.L. (2013) Electric Motor Control. 10th Ed. Cengage Learning.
Hughes A. and Brury B. (2019) Electric Motors and Drives: Fundamentals, Types and
Applications . 5th Ed. Newnes.
Kitcher C. (2018) Practical Guide to Inspection, Testing and Certification of Electrical
Installations . 4th Ed. Routledge.
Kumar J., Tripathy M. and Jena P. (Editors) (2023) Control Applications in Modern Power
Systems: Select Proceedings of EPREC 2021 − Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering 870
(Paperback). Springer Verlag.
Maycock W.P. (2023) Electric Lighting and Power Distribution: An Elementary Manual On
Electrical Engineering, Suitable For Students Preparing For The Preliminary And Ordinary
Grade Examinations Of The City And Guilds Of London Institute ; Volume 1 (Hardback).
Legare Street Press.
Neitzel D.K. (2019), Capelli-Schellpfeffer M. and Winfield A. (2019) Electrical Safety
Handbook (ELECTRONICS) Hardcover. McGraw Hill.
Olsen I. (2017 ) Electrical Generation and Distribution Systems and Power Quality
Disturbances (Hardback). Scitus Academics LLC.
Ree J.M.P. (2022) Lecture Notes on Electrical lighting illumination: Simplified Approach
(Paperback).
Taylor W.T. (2023) Electric Power Systems: A Practical Treatment of the Main Conditions,
Problems, Facts and Principles in the Installation and Operation of Modern Electric Power
Systems, for System Operators, General Electrical Engineers and Students (Paperback).
Legare Street Press.
The Institution of Engineering and Technology. BS 7671 − 18th Edition: The IET Wiring
Regulations Information and help for electrical installers .
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
201
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
IEEE Industry Applications Magazine
IEEE Power and Energy Magazine
IEEE Sensors
IEEE Transactions on Power Systems
Journal of Electrical Systems
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4019: Electrical and Electronic Principles
Unit 4021: Electrical Machines
Unit 4022: Electronic Circuits and Devices.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
202
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025