Unit 4027: CAD for Schematics in
Maintenance Engineering
Unit Code: Y/651/0898
Level: 4
Credits: 15
Introduction
There is a growing trend, in part due to the popularity of three-dimensional (3D)
Computer Aided Design (CAD) systems, for students to generate two-dimensional (2D)
drawings from three-dimensional (3D) solid models. 3D models do look impressive
and whilst they clearly serve an important function in CAD design, in reality the vast
majority of CAD drawings used in the industry are 2D based and, of those, a
significant number are schematic drawings utilised by maintenance engineers,
which cannot be produced using a 3D system.
The aim of this unit is to enable students to produce 2D CAD drawings (using industry
standard CAD software), and to modify and construct electrical and mechanical
drawings e.g., distribution systems, fire alarms, steam ranges, electrical and hydraulic
circuits. This unit will support the development of the students’ CAD abilities and build
upon those skills to introduce the more advanced techniques that are used to create
and modify schematic drawings quickly and efficiently. These techniques can be used
to construct pre-prepared symbols for use in circuit diagrams or be used to create
unique symbols and symbol libraries.
Alongside the creation of schematic drawings utilising the block, attributes and insert
commands, the students will also learn how to extract information to populate
spreadsheets and databases, tabulating the information directly from the working
drawing.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
203
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Produce CAD drawings
LO2 Create blocks with textual attributes to perform insert and export operations
LO3 Construct complex schematic drawings
LO4 Transfer information to external sources.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
204
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential content
LO1 Produce CAD drawings
Introduction to the user interface:
Command line, Status Bar, panel titles and tabs
Recognise and apply absolute, relative and polar coordinates.
Drafting aids:
Grid, snap, object snap, ortho and polar tracking.
Draw commands:
Line types, circle, text, hatching, dimensioning.
Modifying commands:
Sketch commands, copy, rotate, move, erase, scale, array, chamfer, fillet
Creating and defining text and dimension styles.
Multiline and Single line text
Creating layers:
Layers/levels, colour, line thicknesses
Viewing commands:
Zoom, pan, viewports and layouts.
Case studies:
Industry relevant CAD examples relevant to maintenance engineers.
LO2 Create blocks with textual attributes to perform insert and export
operations
Blocks and textual attributes:
Creating and editing blocks and write blocks
Defining, editing and managing attributes
Inserting blocks from external sources
Attribute extraction
Dynamic and nested blocks
Using the design centre and tool palettes.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
205
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO3 Construct complex schematic drawings
Complex schematics:
Create block library and table legend, including symbols and description
Create electrical, electronic, hydraulic and pneumatic schematic drawings,
Process Flow Diagrams (PFDs). Engineering Flow Diagrams (EFDs) and
Vent Flow Diagrams (VFDs)
Industry case studies using complex schematic drawings and professional
discussion on good practice observed.
LO4 Transfer information to external sources.
Electronic transfer of information:
Data extraction and data extraction (DXE) files, DWG/DXF files
Step-files ISO 10303-21
Extracting data to tables and spreadsheets
Organise and refine the extracted data
Table styles and formatting data extraction tables
Present CAD related work undertaken to peers or a team of maintenance
engineers and respond to feedback.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
206
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Produce CAD drawings
P1 Propose the range of M1 Contrast the advantages D1 Evaluate the advantages
drawing aids that assist and disadvantages of using of using template files.
productivity. CAD over manual drafting in
support of maintenance
P2 For a given engineering
engineer role.
maintenance context,
produce a template file to
include a range of layers,
dimension styles, text styles,
border and title box.
LO2 Create blocks with textual attributes to perform insert
and export operations LO2 and LO3
P3 Create ten schematic M2 Justify the advantages of D2 Validate how using
symbols. using blocks in a drawing. attributes can improve
productivity.
P4 Add appropriate
attribute data to each of
the schematic symbols
and convert into blocks.
LO3 Construct complex schematic drawings
P5 Construct a block library M3 Describe the advantages
and table legend and of using block libraries and
integrate into a template how they can enhance
file. templates.
P6 Create a complex
schematic drawing using
electrical/electronic or
hydraulic symbols.
LO4 Transfer information to external sources
P7 Transfer attribute data to M4 Appraise the process for D3 Assess how electronic
Excel spreadsheets. extracting drawing data to transfer of information
create a table. can aid productivity, with
P8 Explain the advantages of
example engineering
using data extraction (i.e.,
maintenance applications.
DXE, DWG, DXF) files.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
207
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Bi Z. and WANG X. (2020) Computer Aided Design and Manufacturing . Wiley.
BS 8888 (2017) Technical product documentation and specification .
Metwalli S.M. (2021) Machine Design with CAD and Optimization . Wiley.
Omura G. and Benton B.C. (2014) Mastering AutoCAD 2015 and AutoCAD
LT 2015 Essentials . Autodesk Official Press
Pitroda H. P (2019) Computer Aided Design: Textbook and Practice book .
Walnut publication
Sarkar J., (2014). Computer aided design: a conceptual approach . CRC Press.
Shih R.H. (2024) Principles and Practice: An Integrated Approach to Engineering Graphics
and AutoCAD 2024 . 1st Ed. SDC Publications.
Simmons C.H., Dennis E. and Maguire N.P. (2020) Manual of Engineering Drawing −
British and International Standards. 5th Ed. Butterworth-Heinemann.
Stark J. (2021) What Every Engineer Should Know about Practical CAD/CAM Applications.
CRC Press.
Zeus Precision Charts Ltd. Zeus Precision Data Charts and Reference Tables for Drawing
Office, Toolroom & Workshop .
Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
CAD Journal – CAD and Applications
Computer-Aided Design
Computer-Aided Design and Applications
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4001: Engineering Design
Unit 4023: Computer Aided Design and Manufacture (CAD/CAM)
Unit 4034: Computer Aided Design (CAD) for Engineering.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
208
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025