Unit 4030: Industry 4.0
Unit Code: F/651/0755
Level: 4
Credits: 15
Introduction
Industry 4.0 is the term that has been adopted to describe the ‘fourth’ industrial
revolution currently underway, at present, in the manufacturing and commercial
sectors of our society. It is a revolution based on the integration of cyber-physical
systems, Internet of Things, Big data, 3D printing, advanced robotics, simulation,
augmented reality, cloud computing and cyber security. Industry 4.0 is changing the
way the world’s most successful companies produce the products that their global
customers demand. For the engineering and manufacturing sector, this integration
has been enabled by successfully combining high performance computing, the
internet and the development of advanced manufacturing technologies and highly
flexible and adaptive manufacturing processes.
The aim of this unit is to provide holistic understanding of industry 4.0 and current
trends of the production, assembly and other key aspects modern manufacturing.
Students are first introduced to the background and fundamental and historical
concepts of the fourth industrial revolution and principles, technologies, and
strategies driving it. Students will then explore cutting-edge technologies, such as
the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT), cyber-physical production systems (CPPS) and
artificial intelligence, and learn how these innovations are transforming traditional
manufacturing processes and business models. Students are expected to reflect on
successful case studies of transitioning to Industry 4.0 and communicate the industry
4.0 concepts, technologies, and implications.
On successful completion of this unit students will be able to investigate and
evaluate industrial revolutions along with the characteristics and real-world
challenges. As potential managers, students will also be able to
assess the transformation of supply chains, business models, and workforce dynamics
in the context of Industry 4.0 and associated benefits.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
227
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Discuss the key concepts and principles of Industry 4.0
LO2 Review the range of cyber-physical production systems (CPPS) shaping
Industry 4.0 and their integration with the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT)
LO3 Explore the implications and impacts of Industry 4.0 in engineering and
manufacturing processes and technologies
LO4 Examine the factors manufacturers need to consider when transitioning
to Industry 4.0 and workforce Implications.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
228
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Discuss the key concepts and principles of Industry 4.0
Industrial revolution:
Industry 4.0 historical context: changes from Industry 1.0 to Industry 4.0 and
future trends (e.g. Industry 5.0); analogous terms (e.g., Space 4.0, Agriculture 4.0,
Maritime 4.0, Mining 4.0, Medical 4.0 etc.)
Fundamental concepts and characterisations
Design for service (DFS), Design for Assembly (DfA) and Design for Manufacturing
(DfM) in the age of industry 4.Design Failure Mode and Effect Analysis (DFMEA)
Technology drivers: IoT, IIoT, Artificial Intelligence (AI), cloud computing and
automation; integration of digital technologies, data and automation
Areas of impact and applications: For example, − workforce, skills, efficiency,
change management; applications in energy, automotive, health and pharma,
Agrifood, transportation, social mobility, business, science and technology,
communications, geography etc.
Case studies: Example smart factory − connectivity, scalability, autonomy, agility,
efficiency, voice-controlled user interfaces.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
229
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO2 Review the range of cyber-physical production systems (CPPS) shaping
Industry 4.0 and their integration with the Industrial Internet of Things
(IIoT)
Definitions, characteristics, and architecture
Interconnected systems enabled by the IoT and cloud computing
Components of CPPS: sensors/smart sensors, actuators and communication
protocols including wireless protocols e.g. WiFi, Bluetooth, Zigbee, MQTT,
cellular, data, Z-Wave, near-field communication (NFC)
Data in Industry 4.0: data collection systems, data formats and storage, database
solutions, data visualisation, forecasting, quality control, data-driven decision-
making; data analytics – big data, types including streaming, spatial, time series,
prescriptive, predictive, and decisive analytics.
Cloud computing and Industry 4.0: Types (SaaS, IaaS, PaaS); uses with IoT/IIoT;
developments such as industrial edge computing, communication protocols and
data protection.
Flow diagram of data/information transfer in the cloud
Blockchain technology applications for Industry 4.0
Threats, vulnerabilities, and risk mitigation
Data protection, privacy and compliance.
LO3 Explore the implications and impacts of Industry 4.0 in engineering and
manufacturing processes and technologies
Robotics and automation in modern manufacturing:
Collaborative, programmable robots and autonomous systems
AI driven decision making and optimisation
Importance of 3D Printing in Industry 4.0
Concept and applications of Digital Twins for manufacturing
Applications of Augmented and Virtual Reality in manufacturing,
relevant development/usage platforms (e.g., HoloLens, Metaverse)
Data-Driven Manufacturing
Process mining – types, tools, sector wide examples.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
230
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO4 Examine the factors manufacturers need to consider when transitioning to
Industry 4.0 and workforce Implications
Standardisation of technologies:
Application interfaces, Integration points and Automation technologies.
Transforming Operational Processes:
Digital Transformation, Merge OT with IT, Worker Mobility, Intelligent Machine
Applications.
Transforming Business Models:
New Digital Business, Industrial Analytics, Identify and procure suitable resources
including finance, supplies, tools and equipment; role of stakeholders; Supplier,
manufacturer, and customer integration.
Transform the Workforce:
Support and training for the workforce, safe and professional working practices,
ethical and social considerations, legislative requirements, functional safety
standards and application (IEC 61508, IEC 61511, IEC 62061, ISO 10218, IEC
61784, EN 50159, IEC 62280, IEC 62443), environment and sustainability
considerations.
Safety first culture within the context:
Health and safety policies, procedures and regulations, compliance,
risk assessment and mitigation.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
231
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Discuss the key concepts and principles of Industry 4.0
P1 Discuss the key milestones M1 Analyse two different use D1 Evaluate the
of industrial revolutions cases for the main technology application areas, wider
leading to the Industry 4.0. drivers of Industry 4.0. impact and threats of
Industry 4.0.
P2 Describe any two example M2 Explore the implications
areas of impacts for Industry of DFMEA in the context of
4.0 in a chosen sector of Industry 4.0.
engineering and
manufacturing.
LO2 Review the range of cyber-physical production systems
(CPPS) shaping Industry 4.0 and their integration with the
Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT)
P3 Review the relationship M3 Analyse the principles and D2 Evaluate a case study
between cyber-physical benefits of cloud computing design of cyber-physical
production systems (CPPS) and its role with suppliers, systems architecture with
and the Internet of Things manufacturers, and customers complete process flow
(IoT). within Industry 4.0 for an for Industry 4.0 based
example case study. manufacturing systems.
P4 Explore a program plan
for the IOT and a range of M4 Investigate the risk
wireless communication mitigation strategies for the
protocols available for the treats and vulnerabilities of
smart factory. cyber physical systems within a
case study.
LO3 Explore the implications and impacts of Industry 4.0 in
engineering and manufacturing processes and technologies
P5 Examine the process flow M5 Explore the role of robotics D3 Demonstrate the
for the design of data-driven and automation in modern application and benefits
manufacturing. production and of digital twinning for
manufacturing. Industry 4.0
P6 Explore Process mining
manufacturing.
within a given engineering/
manufacturing sector.
LO4 Examine the factors manufacturers need to consider when
transitioning to Industry 4.0 and workforce Implications
P7 Examine the key principles M6 Analyse the potential skills D4 Critique the digital
of operational process required by the Industry 4.0 business models within
transformation to workforce to enable effective Industry 4.0 for agile
Industry 4.0. transition. transition.
P8 Explore the safety
requirements and standards
for transition to Industry 4.0.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
232
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
André J. (2019) Industry 4.0: Paradoxes and Conflicts. Wiley.
Bali V., Bhatnagar V., Aggarwal D., Bali S., and Diván M. J. (2021) Cyber-Physical, IoT,
and Autonomous Systems in Industry 4.0. CRC Press.
Barkai, J. (2016) The Outcome Economy: How the Industrial Internet of Things
is Transforming Everyday Business . CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform.
Elanqovan U. (2023) Industry 5.0 The Future of the Industrial Economy. 1st Ed. CRC Press.
Frenz W. (2022) Handbook Industry 4.0. Springer.
Hassoun A. (2024) Food Industry 4.0. 1st Ed. Elsevier.
Kandasamy J., Muduli K., Kommula V. P., and Meena P. L. (2023) Smart Manufacturing
Technologies For Industry 4.0 Integration, Benefits, and Operational Activities. CRC PRESS.
Massaro A. (2021) Electronics in Advanced Research Industries: Industry 4.0 to Industry 5.0
Advances. Wiley.
Mavropoulos A. and Nilsen A.W. (2020) Industry 4.0 and Circular Economy: Towards a
Wasteless Future or a Wasteful Planet? Wiley.
Sharifzadeh M. (2022) Industry 4.0 Vision for the Supply of Energy and Materials: Enabling
Technologies and Emerging Applications. Wiley.
Sullivan M. and Kern J. (2021) The Digital Transformation of Logistics: Demystifying
Impacts of the Fourth Industrial Revolution. Wiley.
Tromp J.G., Le D. and Le C.V. (2020) Emerging Extended Reality Technologies for Industry
4.0: Early Experiences with Conception, Design, Implementation, Evaluation and
Deployment. Wiley.
Vasant P., Munapo E., Thomas J.J., and Weber G. (2022) Artificial Intelligence in Industry
4.0 and 5G Technology. Wiley.
Windpassinger, N. (2017) Digitize or Die: Transform your Organisation, Embrace the
Digital Evolution, Rise above the Competition . New York: IoT Hub.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
233
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
Manufacturing Letters
Cogent Engineering
Complex and Intelligent systems
Industry 4.0 Clustering of Concepts and Characteristics
New Frontiers in Industry 4.0
Procedia Manufacturing
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4068: Industrial Robots
Unit 4085: Mechatronic Systems in Manufacturing
Unit 5017: Advanced Manufacturing Technology
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
234
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025