Unit 4033: Programmable Logic
Controllers
Unit Code: T/651/0760
Level: 4
Credits: 15
Introduction
The programmable logic controller (PLC) has revolutionised the automation industry.
Since Richard Morley’s Modicon invention at General Motors in the 1970s, the PLC has
been the standard solution for industrial automation. Today PLCs can be found in
everything from manufacturing equipment to vending machines, and PLC system
development for automated systems is a highly specialised and demanding area of
engineering.
The aim of this unit is to enable students to understand the rationale behind the
use of programmable logic controllers and their applications in industry. The unit
combines practical skills and knowledge in developing PLC applications from real
scenarios with theoretical principles, such as communication and networking
protocols.
On successful completion of this unit students will have developed an understanding
of the evolution, types and applications of PLCs. They will know how to select
and develop a PLC system, integrate features of functional safety based on their
understanding of risk management, and evaluate the wide range of communication
technologies available on modern PLCs.
Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Describe the design, operation and selection of PLC systems
LO2 Explore Functional Safety within PLC systems
LO3 Develop a PLC program for an automated process system
LO4 Review how PLCs exchange information and process signals with other devices.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
251
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Describe the design, operation and selection of PLC systems
PLC architecture and operation:
central processing unit (CPU), data memory, program memory, speed, scan time,
power supply, output current rating
Input/output (I/O) interface: digital, analogue, relay, transistors, TRIACs,
opto-coupling.
PLC types and selection:
Compact, modular and rack-mounted
Distributed control systems and programmable automated controllers
PLC manufacturers
Latest PLC case studies.
LO2 Explore Functional Safety within PLC systems
Functional Safety standards:
Evolution of Safety and Risk management
IEC61508 (Electrical, Electronic and Programmable Equipment)
IEC61131 (PLCs), IEC61131-3 (Languages)
IEC61511 (Process Control) IEC62061 (Machinery)
Hazard and risk assessment
Hazard and operability analysis (HAZOP)
Failure modes and effects analysis (FMEA)
Fault tree analysis (FTA)
Safety integrity levels, redundancy (back-up or failsafe).
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
252
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO3 Develop a PLC program for an automated process system
Logic control circuits:
AND, OR, NAND, NOR, XOR, combinational logic, latching circuits.
Number systems:
Binary, decimal, hexadecimal, octal number representation and conversion
Memory: bits, bytes, nibbles, word, long/double
Signed and unsigned values.
PLC programming:
Industrial Standard IEC61131; PLC software tools
Ladder logic operation: rungs, input, process, output
Variables: Boolean, integer, floating point
Inputs, outputs, delay functions, timers, counters, latches, registers,
comparison blocks, math operators, function blocks, simulation, debugging,
hardware testing, fault finding
Peer review of programming activities (e.g., design, code, test plan),
program demonstration and profession discussion including good practice.
Documentation:
Requirements and specification, flow chart, functional chart, sequence table,
input/output or allocation list, wiring diagram, test data.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
253
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO4 Review how PLCs exchange information and process signals with other
devices
Digital communication basics:
Digital versus analogue communication: analogue to digital conversion (ADC),
digital to analogue conversion (DAC)
Sampling rate, resolution, errors
Noise: decoding, encoding, pulse code modulation (PCM)
Elements of a digital communication system; digital communication medium.
PLC communication and networking:
Fieldbus, profibus, modbus, ethernet, profinet
OSI model, RS232, RS485, USB, parallel, serial
Controlled area network (CAN)
Supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA)
Remote terminal unit (RTU)
Human–machine interface (HMI).
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
254
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Describe the design, operation and selection of PLC
systems
P1 Describe the architecture M1 Analyse the suitability D1 Justify the selection
and operation of of programmable logic of a programmable logic
programmable logic controllers (PLCs) with controller for a given
controllers. programmable automation application.
controllers (PACs) for given
P2 Compare the design and
applications.
applications of Compact,
modular and rack-mounted
PLCs.
P3 Describe the range of
input/output devices and
PLC interface techniques.
LO2 Explore Functional Safety within PLC systems
P4 Explore the requirement M2 Apply functional safety D2 Evaluate functional
of functional safety within analysis on a PLC based safety and its integration
industrial PLC systems. automated process system. into PLC systems to
minimise hazards and risks.
P5 Compare the range of
IEC6113-3 languages and
their applications.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
255
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Pass Merit Distinction
LO3 Develop a PLC program for an automated process
system
P6 Translate a digital logic M3 Apply methods of testing D3 Evaluate the PLC
control circuit into an and debugging hardware program for an automated
equivalent PLC program. and software in PLC systems. process system and make
justifiable modifications.
P7 Produce design and
planning documentation
associated with the
preparation of a PLC
program.
P8 Design and develop
a functionally safe PLC
program for an automated
process system.
LO4 Review how PLCs exchange information and process
signals with other devices.
P9 Describe the M4 Assess the use and D4 Evaluate fieldbus and
characteristics and integration of SCADA and Ethernet technologies for
methods of digital data HMI’s with PLCs in industry. industrial manufacturing
communication for PLCs. applications.
P10 Review common
communication
technologies available
on a range of PLCs.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
256
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Bolton W. (2015) Programmable Logic Controllers . 6th Ed. Elsevier.
Dawkins N. (ed.) (2014) Automation and Controls: A guide to Automation, Controls,
PLCs and PLC Programming .
Johnson Jr C.H. and Sanusi A.L. (2022) PLC Programming from Novice to Professional:
Learn PLC Programming with Training Videos (Paperback). Ojula Technology Innovations.
Manesis S. and Nikolakopoulos G. (2018) Introduction to Industrial Automation. 1st Ed.
Routledge, Taylor and Francis Group.
Perez A. E. (2012) Introduction to PLCs: A beginner’s guide to Programmable Logic
Controllers .
Petruzella F. (2023) Programmable Logic Controllers. 6th Ed. McGraw Hill.
Stewart G.R. (2021) Siemens Plc Programming For Beginners: [Step-by-Step Instructions]
How Can I Quickly and Easily Learn PLC Programming at Home? Independent publication.
White M.T. (2023) Mastering PLC Programming: The software engineering survival guide to
automation programming (Paperback) . Packt Publishing Limited.
Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
Automation and Remote Control
Automation
Electrical, Electronics and Communications Engineering (Applied Sciences)
IFAC Journal of Systems and Control
IEEE Journal on Robotics and Automation
IEEE Potentials (Programmable Logic Controllers)
International Journal of Automation and Control (IJAAC)
International Journal of Innovative Research in Technology & Science
Journal of AI, Robotics and Workplace Automation
Journal of Automation and Intelligence
Programmable Logic Controllers (Special issue)
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
257
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4015: Automation, Robotics and Programmable Logic Controllers (PLCs)
Unit 4016: Instrumentation and Control Systems
Unit 4030: Industry 4.0
Unit 4068: Industrial Robots
Unit 5009: Further Programmable Logic Controllers (PLCs)
Unit 5021: Further Control Systems Engineering.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
258
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025