Unit 4061: Programming for Engineers
Unit Code: A/650/2923
Level: 4
Credits: 15
Introduction
With the increasing programmability of devices, it is essential that engineers can
define and develop software artefacts. Engineers are often involved in developing
programs for a wide variety of projects, such as creating firmware, automating robots
and machines, modelling conceptual designs, processing data, and developing
machine-learning models. By acquiring programming competencies, engineers
can meet these challenges, reap the benefits of customised designs, and develop
solutions to solve future engineering problems, thus enhancing their career
prospects.
This unit provides engineering students with a comprehensive introduction to
programming. Students will be able to investigate different software development
platforms, programming paradigms, programming languages (e.g. Python, C or C++),
and their engineering applications. They will gain the experience of going through
a standard development process; from setting requirements through to design,
implementation, testing and maintenance. The unit also covers program design,
structure, and syntax through project activities. Students will be assessed on
creating programs that are efficient, functional, reliable, and maintainable.
On completion of this unit, students will have acquired essential knowledge and skills
in programming using a popular language that can be utilised in Level 5 units such as
Machine Learning and Embedded Systems.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
464
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Discuss key aspects of software evolution and development in the context of
engineering applications
LO2 Design a programming solution for an engineering problem
LO3 Implement a programming solution for an engineering problem
LO4 Perform testing of the programming solution to meet defined requirements
and to ensure high-quality outputs.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
465
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Discuss key aspects of software evolution and development in the context
of engineering applications
Programming in engineering:
Evolution of programming concepts; paradigms (e.g. object-oriented, event-
driven, procedural, functional); development platforms including IDEs;
current/future trends
Processes/components of programming environment (i.e. microcomputer
hardware: CPU, arithmetic logic unit (ALU), registers, memory; fetch-execute
cycles)
Devices/systems that can be programmed (e.g. computers, mobile phones,
tablets, industrial controllers, field-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs))
Programming languages and platforms with which to program devices/systems
(e.g. Python, C, C++, C#, ADA, Java and MATLAB); comparisons (e.g. compiled
versus interpreted languages).
Engineering applications and practical skills:
Project-based learning (PBL) approach for understanding planning, development
and delivery of small/medium-sized engineering applications
Software engineering principles, software development life cycle, methodologies
(e.g. agile, waterfall), roles and responsibilities of a development team (e.g.
analyst, programmer, tester, Scrum master, product owner), modelling and
prototyping. Overview of Engineering project management techniques for
programmers (e.g. SWOT, stakeholder matrices, risk mapping, radar chart
and summary risk profiles).
Edit, execute and test example engineering applications
Developer attributes: responsibility towards planning and prioritisation of
development activities in meeting business needs, ability to work independently,
pro-active, initiative, communicative, keen to analyse root cause of problems,
contextual knowledge and skills for practice, solve and develop efficient and
ethical solutions
Programming case studies:
Embedded systems, automation, Industry 4.0, machine learning (AI), networking,
Internet of Things (e.g. smart factories), cloud computing, cybersecurity;
concepts, purpose and application
Industry relevance (e.g. manufacturing, defence, medical, automotive,
aeronautics, space technologies, utilities, consumer goods)
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
466
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Occupation-centric: programming tools for diagnostics (e.g. web-based
diagnostics for network devices and other software tools such as PROFITrace),
interconnected occupational competencies (e.g. network engineers to bring
together programming skills and network installation and management skills
to solve problems).
Best practices:
Coding standards, secure programming, green coding, programmer ethics,
accessibility.
LO2 Design a programming solution for an engineering problem
Program design, structure and maintenance:
Requirements analysis and specification, flow and function charts, pseudocode,
selection and application of design methodology, design for testing and
maintenance, occupational role and relevance in designing maintainable
software solutions (e.g. use of software tools/techniques for troubleshooting
network issues, securely isolate and debug faults, automate different aspects
of network maintenance)
Documentation of design (e.g. project name, description, version control such as
Git and commentary); reading, extracting and interpreting technical, business
related and other relevant documentation.
Programming features:
Data types and operators (i.e. integers, floating point, strings, characters,
Boolean, arithmetic, relational, logical, bitwise, assignment)
Data type qualifiers (e.g. mutable and immutable)
Classes and object-oriented programming (OOP) concepts (i.e. abstraction,
polymorphism, encapsulation, inheritance)
Data structures (i.e. arrays, lists, sets)
Control structures (i.e. decision, selection, and iterative statements)
Input/output (i.e. file reading and writing, standard I/O, databases)
Libraries (i.e. GUI, networking, logging)
Data management: cleaning data, producing statistical analysis of data.
Algorithmic design and development:
Example algorithms for engineering problems (e.g., path finding)
Design algorithms for a range of small engineering applications
Complexity analysis, Big-O notation.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
467
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO3 Implement a programming solution for an engineering problem
Benefits of modular design:
Development efficiency, maintainability, testability, reusability and debugging.
Declaring, defining and calling functions:
Naming, return type and arguments (parameters), function body
Passing data to and receiving data from functions, call functions by value,
and call by reference
Life cycle of variables in functions (e.g. global versus local, class versus instance)
Recursive functions.
Preprocessor directives:
Include, import statements, C header files, macro definitions, sharing between
multiple source files, #define, #ifndef statements
Python packages.
Program development and implementation:
Develop and implement small engineering applications using a suitable
programming language; develop documentation to industry standards and
style guides
Explore team approach to program development and delivery
Consider possible user-experience concerns and how these could be solved.
LO4 Perform testing of the programming solution to meet defined
requirements and to ensure high-quality outputs
Overview of testing:
Software testing frameworks and methodologies including functional (e.g. unit
testing, integration, system, acceptance) and non-functional (e.g. usability,
performance, security, compatibility) methods; tools and techniques to monitor
and enhance performance against requirements
Test environments
Continuous integration/continuous development (CI/CD) pipeline and continuous
testing.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
468
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Approach to testing:
Relationship between test activities and program development activities; identify
elements that need to be tested; consider data that should be used to fully test
the program; match tests against the defined requirements (e.g. user, system);
use of test harnesses
Use of relevant test procedures: test plans, test techniques (e.g. open-box,
closed-box); testing documentation (e.g. reports, plans, checklists)
Overview of alpha and beta testing.
Debugging:
Use of debugger tools; documentation of the debugging process with reference
to watch lists, breakpoints, and tracing
Debugging the process to fix vulnerabilities, defects and bugs in code
Understand coding standards and their benefits when writing program code in a
team as well as for the individual.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
469
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Discuss key aspects of software evolution and
development in the context of engineering applications
P1 Discuss the key stages of M1 Analyse the suitability D1 Evaluate industry-
the software development life of any two specific recognised best practices
cycle, including the roles and software life-cycle models in using software life-cycle
responsibilities of team for a given engineering models for engineering
members problem. problems.
P2 Present a choice of
programming languages and
development platforms for a
given engineering problem.
LO2 Design a programming solution for an engineering
problem LO2, LO3 and LO4
P3 Produce an outline M2 Refine the D2 Reflect on the design,
requirements specification requirements specification implementation, testing and
for a given engineering and a suitable design documentation aspects of
application solution to cover the full engineering programming
set of requirements, solutions, including use of
P4 Design a suitable
including modularity and coding standards and why
algorithmic solution for
maintainability. it is necessary in a team as
the key requirements.
well as for the individual.
LO3 Implement a programming solution for an engineering
problem
P5 Implement a given design M3 Refine the
solution for an engineering implemented solution
problem using an appropriate for modularity and
programming language maintainability.
P6 Demonstrate successful
execution of the developed
solution in a chosen
programming environment.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
470
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Pass Merit Distinction
LO4 Perform testing of the programming solution to meet
defined requirements and to ensure high-quality outputs.
P7 Produce a test plan to M4 Analyse the
demonstrate whether the effectiveness of testing,
program meets the key including an explanation
requirements of the choice of tests used
P8 Perform tests on the M5 Demonstrate the use
program against the key of debugging tools to
requirements, resolving identify and correct errors
any functional errors. in a programming solution
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
471
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
This unit does not specify which programme language should be used to deliver this
content – this decision can be made by the academic staff.
Examples of languages that are used in industry are Python, C, C++, C#, ADA, Java,
and MATLAB but any language which will allow the student to achieve the Learning
Outcomes is acceptable.
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Bradley R. (2011) Programming for Engineers: A Foundational Approach to Learning C and
MATLAB . Springer.
Clough D.E. and Chapra S.C. (2023) Spreadsheet Problem Solving and Programming for
Engineers and Scientists (Hardback). Taylor & Francis Ltd.
Cyganek B. (2020) Introduction to Programming with C++ for Engineers . Wiley/IEEE Press.
Kenan A. (2020) Python for Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering .
Nagar S. (2017) Introduction to Python for Engineers and Scientists . Apress.
Sanchez J. and Canton M.P. (2017) Java Programming for Engineers (Hardback).
Taylor & Francis Ltd.
Sierra K., Bates B. and Gee T. (2022) Head First Java. 3rd Ed . O’Reilly Media.
Sola A. (2021) Hardcore Programming For Mechanical Engineers: Build Engineering
Applications from Scratch (Paperback). No Starch Press,US.
Wei-Bing J., Aizenman H., Espinel E.M.C., Gunnerson K. and Liu J. (2022) An Introduction
to Python Programming for Scientists and Engineers (Paperback). Cambridge University
Press.
Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
Advances in Engineering Software
Computer Applications in Engineering Education
Journal of Computer Science and Control Systems
Programming Journal .
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
472
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 5013: Embedded Systems
Unit 5047: Computer Architecture and Interfacing
Unit 5050: Machine Learning Systems and Programming.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
473
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025