Unit 4063: Engineering Mechanics and
Materials
Unit Code: F/650/2943
Level: 4
Credits: 15
Introduction
Every aspect of engineering depends upon the use and manipulation of materials.
Whether naturally occurring or man-made, it is the properties of these materials that
are fundamental to their creation, processing and application.
This unit explores the fundamental structure of common engineering materials, their
principal mechanical, chemical and electrical properties, and how these properties
affect manufacture, application, service life and end-of-life management and
recycling. Systems for categorising and ranking materials are also covered.
Finally, the service life performance of these materials is studied through calculations
that measure their performance in static and dynamic applications, building on the
work started in the associated level 4 unit, Engineering Science.
On successful completion of this unit, students will be able to identify the underlying
structural properties of engineering materials and how these properties relate to their
application and performance. They will also be confident in completing calculations
relating to the static performance of these materials when in service.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
484
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit a student will be able to:
LO1 Describe the fundamental structures of common engineering materials
LO2 Determine the most important properties of engineering materials
LO3 Assess the performance of engineering materials using key indicators, including
materials constraints and established database resources
LO4 Calculate solutions to problems within static and dynamic mechanical systems,
with consideration of constraints on performance.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
485
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Describe the fundamental structures of common engineering materials
Classification of materials:
Metals, polymers, ceramics, composites, semiconductors, biomaterials, smart
and nano materials; sub-classification of important materials, for example,
ferrous and non-ferrous metals, alloys, thermoplastic and thermosetting
polymers.
Structure of materials:
Atomic and molecular bonding; bonding forces; primary atomic bonding; ionic,
covalent, hybridisation and metallic bonding
Secondary bonding, van der Waals forces, dipole bonds; mixed bonding and
bonding energies
Crystallography of materials, unit cells, crystal systems, cubic and hexagonal;
single crystal and polycrystalline materials; defects, dislocations, slip planes
and impurities; polymorphism and allotropy, introduction to phase diagrams;
non-crystalline (amorphous) materials
Structure and application of specific common materials, including metals,
polymers and ceramics; changes to structure and properties due to alloying,
doping, heat treatment and processing.
LO2 Determine the most important properties of engineering materials
Types of properties:
Mechanical, electrical, chemical, thermal, magnetic, optical and deteriorative
(decay); examples of the importance of listed properties and common values;
reasons for variation in a material’s properties, for example, processing, heat
treatment, operating environment
The importance of these properties in design and operation.
Properties of engineering materials:
Definitions, units, applicability and expected values for common material, for
example, density, modulus of elasticity, Poisson’s ratio, yield and tensile strength,
percentage elongation, strength and fracture toughness, coefficient of thermal
expansion and thermal conductivity, specific heat capacity and electrical
resistivity; appreciation of quantitative and qualitative aspects of the properties
of engineering materials
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
486
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Examples of the importance of listed properties and common values; use of
commercial material properties databases to find these values.
LO3 Assess the performance of engineering materials using key indicators,
including materials constraints and established database resources
Links between materials properties and structural design:
Design constraints; operating conditions – temperature, loading and
environment; cost, availability, processability, appearance and environmental
constraints.
Materials selection and the design process:
Analysing the requirements, converting customer’s request into a list of
constraints for materials selection, creating materials specification parameters;
forms of supply of common materials, stock items and special order; research
using databases and online sources (e.g. Ansys Granta Selector, Matmatch,
Cambridge Engineering Selector, suppliers’ catalogues); suggest possible
solutions; market analysis (availability, cost and type of supply form); impact on
manufacturing/production methods (e.g. single, batch, flow and mass), test and
evaluate selection against specification parameters using simulation software;
sustainability, end of life and recycling considerations
Report preparation, presentation, feedback, evaluation and modification.
LO4 Calculate solutions to problems within static and dynamic mechanical
systems, with consideration of constraints on performance.
Shafts and beams:
Revision of basics, Newton’s second law, static equilibrium, types of beams and
supports, shear force and bending moment calculations; bending in beams,
engineers’ theory of bending; selection of appropriate beams and columns to
meet given specifications.
Torsion:
Revision of shear stress and strain; theory of torsion in solid and hollow circular
shafts, engineers’ theory of torsion, power transmitted by a shaft; composite
shafts.
Introduction to dynamics:
Revision of conservation of energy and work-energy transfer in engineering
systems; linear velocity, angular velocity and acceleration; velocity and
acceleration diagrams of planar mechanisms; introduction to gyroscopic motion.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
487
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Describe the fundamental structures of common
engineering materials
P1 Describe the crystalline M1 Detail the differences D1 Differentiate between
structures of the three most between the effects of polymorphism and allotropy,
common unit cells found in impurities, alloying specifying how the allotropy
metals and link these cell elements and doping of iron is employed in the
types to the metals’ processes on the heat treatment of steel to
engineering properties. properties of an alter its engineering
engineering material. properties.
P2 Discuss the different
material associated with
amorphous and crystalline
polymer structures.
LO2 Determine the most important properties of
engineering materials
P3 Determine the most M2 Describe how the D2 Evaluate Poisson’s ratio
important properties, properties of metals can and Young’s modulus to
for a given application, be modified by their explain their significance
of engineering materials. production processes and in material selection for
how these effects can be a specific application.
P4 Explain why the correct
subsequently relieved.
assessment of a materials’
in-service behaviour is
considered so important
when selecting a material
for a particular application.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
488
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Pass Merit Distinction
LO3 Assess the performance of engineering materials
using key indicators, including materials constraints and
established database resources
P5 Use a commercial M3 Prepare a customer D3 Explore how metals
database to establish report for a fully costed and polymers are currently
values for given material application using a recycled and arrangements
properties. commercial database, for end-of-life decisions are
offering at least two made for manufactured
P6 Assess suitable materials
alternatives for products.
for given products,
consideration.
specifying the normal
form of supply for your
suggestions.
LO4 Calculate solutions to problems within static and
dynamic mechanical systems, with consideration of
constraints on performance.
P7 Calculate the shear force,
M4 Construct diagrams to D4 Discuss the relationship
bending moment and stress
find the vector solutions of between the various forms of
due to bending in given
velocities and accelerations mechanical energy and their
examples of simply within planar mechanisms. conservation.
supported beams.
P8 Carry out selection
exercises for given beams
and columns.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
489
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Ashby M.F. and Jones D.R.H. (2012) Engineering Materials 2 . 4th Ed.
Butterworth-Heinemann.
Ashby M.F. and Jones D.R.H. (2018) Engineering Materials 1 . 5th Ed.
Butterworth-Heinemann.
Callister W.D. and RETHWISCH D.G. (2020) Materials Science and Engineering .
10th Ed. Wiley.
Chehade F.H., Hu C. and Wang K. (Editors) (2022) Applied Mechanics and Engineering −
Applied Mechanics and Materials (Paperback). Trans Tech Publications Ltd.
Hertzberg R.W., Vinci R.P. and Hertzberg J.L. (2021) Deformation and Fracture Mechanics
of Engineering Materials (Paperback). John Wiley & Sons Inc.
Hu J.W. (Editor) (2021) Applied Engineering, Materials and Mechanics IV − Key Engineering
Materials (Paperback). Trans Tech Publications Ltd.
Kalpakjian S. and Schmid S.R. (2013) Manufacturing Engineering and Technology .
7th Ed. Pearson.
Mittelstedt C. (2023) Engineering Mechanics 2: Strength of Materials: An introduction with
many examples (Paperback). Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden.
Nugroho A.A. and Dahham O.S. (Editors) (2023) Engineering Materials and Engineering
Design − Applied Mechanics and Materials (Paperback). Trans Tech Publications Ltd.
Tooley M. and Dingle L. (2021) Engineering Science: For Foundation Degree and Higher
National . 2nd Ed. Routledge.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
490
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
ACS Applied Engineering Materials
Advanced Engineering Materials
Composites Part B: Engineering
European Journal of Mechanics
International journal of Refractory Metals and Hard Materials
Journal of Engineering Materials and Technology
Journal of Engineering Mechanics
Journal of Engineering Mechanics and Machinery
Journal of Materials Processing Technology
Material Science: Science Direct
Material Science and Engineering
Materials & Design
Materials Testing
Probabilistic Engineering Mechanics
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4003: Engineering Science
Unit 4008: Mechanical Principles
Unit 4009: Materials, Properties and Testing
Unit 5003: Advanced Mechanical Principles.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
491
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025