Unit 4064: Analogue and Digital
Electronics
Unit Code: H/650/2944
Level: 4
Credits: 15
Introduction
Analogue and digital electronic systems are widely used for a variety of applications.
These systems provide the building blocks for modern living; for example, smart
devices/homes, Industry 4.0 and autonomous systems. Digital electronics are used
to implement circuits such as the microcontroller-based systems found in mobile
phones, computers, televisions, microwaves and many other devices. Analogue
electronic circuits are commonly used alongside such systems. A smart speaker uses
digital systems to perform ‘smart’ functions and analogue circuits are used to drive
the voice interface and speaker response systems. This unit explores some of the
specialist applications of these systems.
The overall aim of the unit is to introduce students to the fundamental building blocks
of analogue and digital systems. Engineers from the craft technician to the Chartered
Engineer should have an understanding and working knowledge of these technologies
because they underpin all of our electronic devices, both domestic and industrial.
The unit’s learning outcomes promote the development of skills and knowledge in
the areas of digital and analogue electronics: digital electronics – developing an
understanding of the basic logic components and how they are constructed, tested
and used in circuit design; analogue electronics – developing an understanding of
common transistors and transistor circuit design. Transistor and operational amplifier
systems are another focus of the unit; these types of circuits are essential for signal
processing and reproduction.
On successful completion of the unit, students will have developed skills and
knowledge in analogue and digital electronics, which are the basis of all electronic
systems and device, including the understanding and practice of the theory of logic
circuits and how to construct and test such systems, and the understanding and
measurement of analogue circuits.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
492
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit, a student will be able to:
LO1 Investigate logic functions
LO2 Produce tabular and Karnaugh map designs to implement logic systems
LO3 Examine the use of Class A and Class B amplifiers in modern systems
LO4 Investigate operational amplifier circuits and their application.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
493
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Investigate logic functions
Underlying theory:
Logic function implementation: transistor–transistor logic (TTL)
Logic functions: AND, OR, NOT, NAND, NOR and XOR
Complementary metal–oxide–semiconductor (CMOS), emitter-coupled logic (ECL)
and current developments
Testing instruments: Pulser, Logic Probe.
Testing digital gates by simulation:
Test logic gates using simulation: AND, OR, NOT, NAND, NOR and XOR
Data sheets and specifications: fan-out, speed, maximum and minimum ratings.
Testing digital gates using TTL and CMOS devices:
Test logic gates in laboratory experiments using TTL and CMOS devices: AND, OR,
NOT, NAND, NOR and XOR.
LO2 Produce tabular and Karnaugh map designs to implement logic systems
Underlying theory:
Boolean algebra minimisation and reduction techniques
Minimisation using De Morgan’s theorems
Minimisation using Karnaugh maps
Minimisation using truth tables.
Logic functions:
Logic functions: AND, OR, NOT and, by extension, NOT AND (NAND), NOT OR
(NOR) and Exclusive OR (XOR)
Symbols representation, such as American National Standards Institute (ANSI)
and British Standard European Norm (BSEN) Symbols representation using
Boolean algebra, Karnaugh maps and truth tables
De Morgan equivalents.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
494
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Digital design techniques:
Use of reduction techniques on multivariable circuits, with a maximum of four
input variables, to design to a specific requirement: tabular methods, Karnaugh
maps, Boolean algebra
Reduction and construction of logic circuits to a given design specification.
LO3 Examine the use of Class A and Class B amplifiers in modern systems
Underlying theory:
Input and output impedance of Class A, B and C amplifier circuits using bipolar
transistors and metal–oxide–semiconductor field-effect transistors (MOSFETs)
Small-signal and h-parameter models.
Design using bipolar transistors:
Design techniques and requirements of a Class A bipolar transistor amplifier;
determine input and output impedance, as well as bandwidth response
Design techniques and requirements of a Class B bipolar transistor amplifier;
determine input and output impedance as well as bandwidth response.
Design using MOSFETs:
Design techniques and requirements of a Class A MOSFET amplifier;
determine input and output impedance as well as bandwidth response
Design techniques and requirements of a Class B MOSFET amplifier;
determine input and output impedance as well as bandwidth response.
LO4 Investigate operational amplifier circuits and their application.
Underlying theory:
Operational amplifier design: differential pair, Miller effect, current mirror,
long-tailed pair, Class AB amplifier, frequency response, symbol
Operational amplifier parameters: slew rate, offset, common-mode input,
gain–bandwidth product, open-loop gain
Use of data sheets to ascertain design data
Negative feedback model; operational amplifier circuit configurations:
comparator, summing amplifier, inverting amplifier, non-inverting amplifier,
differentiator, integrator, digital-to-analogue converter, oscillators.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
495
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Laboratory practice:
Simulate standard circuits using alternating current (AC) signals: comparator,
inverting amplifier, non-inverting amplifier, differentiator, integrator
Simulate standard circuits using direct current (DC) signals: comparator,
summing amplifier, inverting amplifier, non-inverting amplifier, digital-to-
analogue converter (DAC), and analogue-to-digital converters (ADCs):
simple-ramp ADC, successive-approximation ADC
Construct trigger circuits using comparator designs for light, and for temperature
Use modern diagnostic tools and equipment including Industry 4.0,
cloud-based diagnostics incorporated into network devices and other
software tools (e.g., PROFITrace).
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
496
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Investigate logic functions
P1 Investigate logic M1 Assess device D1 Analyse results after
functions; AND, OR, NOT, performance in terms adapting and testing
NAND, NOT and XOR. of device speed and De Morgan equivalent
functionality. function against the speed
P2 Test logic gates by
performance of the original
simulation and using TTL
device.
and CMOS devices and
standard laboratory
equipment, and present
results.
LO2 Produce tabular and Karnaugh map designs to
implement logic systems
P3 Produce logic circuits to M2 Analyse non-minimised D2 Evaluate the
a given design specification and equivalent logic circuits performance, in terms
using tabular techniques. to confirm function. of speed, cost and
manufacturability, of
P4 Produce logic circuits to
minimised logic circuits to
a given design specification
a given design specification.
using Karnaugh map
techniques.
LO3 Examine the use of Class A and Class B amplifiers in
modern systems
P5 Examine a Class A M3 Analyse Class A and D3 Evaluate amplifier circuits
amplifier operation and Class B amplifiers using using bipolar and MOSFET
functionality. small-signal analysis. devices.
P6 Examine a Class B
amplifier operation and
functionality.
LO4 Investigate operational amplifier circuits and their
application.
P7 Investigate the operation M4 Analyse the D4 Evaluate the performance
of a standard operational performance of an of an operational amplifier
amplifier circuit. operational amplifier circuit compared to its small-signal
in terms of bandwidth, model.
P8 Simulate a standard
input impedance and
operational amplifier circuit
output impedance.
to a given design
specification.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
497
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Floyd, T.L. (2015) Digital Fundamentals . 11th Ed. Pearson.
Horowitz, P. and Hill, W. (2015) The Art of Electronics . 3rd Ed. Cambridge University
Press.
Malvino, A.P., Bates, D.J. and Hoppe, P.E. (2020) Electronic Principles. 8th Ed.
McGraw Hill Education.
Storey, N. (2017) Electronics: A Systems Approach . 6th Ed. Pearson.
Tokheim, R.L. and Hoppe, P.E. (2021) Digital Electronics Principles and Applications.
9th Ed. McGraw Hill.
Websites
digital-library.theiet.org IET Digital Library
‘IET Circuits, Devices and Systems
journal’
(Research)
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4022: Electronic Circuits and Devices
Unit 4067: Digital Devices and Systems
Unit 5014: Analogue Electronic Systems
Unit 5044: Digital Electronic Systems.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
498
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025