Unit 4067: Digital Devices and Systems
Unit Code: L/650/2947
Level: 4
Credits: 15
Introduction
Most of the world is now dependent on infrastructure that uses digital technology.
Digital electronics are used extensively in computing, data storage, communications,
transport, navigation, financial systems, entertainment, and so on. It therefore follows
that many industries, from gaming and complex graphics systems to Formula 1
racing, rely heavily on complex digital technology, usually in either hardware or
software programmable form. As systems and infrastructure become more complex,
it is vital that computer technicians and engineers have knowledge and skills in digital
hardware as well as in software.
This unit introduces the fundamental principles of digital systems by way of simple
functional building blocks using combinational and sequential logic. Using these
blocks, it then looks at design techniques for building more complex functions. Most
modern digital designs are now implemented with programmable technologies such
as microcontrollers and/or programmable logic (e.g. field-programmable gate arrays
(FPGAs), application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs), etc.) rather than using small-
scale integrated circuits (SSIs) and medium-scale integrated circuits (MSIs). This unit
focuses on the design of digital circuits in a hardware description language (HDL)
environment, and physical implementation using a FPGA development board.
Prior to studying this unit, students are expected to have knowledge of the binary
number system.
On successful completion of this unit, students will understand the concepts of digital
systems and be able to identify the most common combinational and sequential
digital building blocks. They will be able to use these blocks and traditional design
techniques to build more complex digital functions. Students will be able to use an
HDL and programmable logic to design and implement combinational and sequential
circuits on a FPGA. This will provide students with the knowledge, understanding
and skills to progress to further study in the use of this technology; to design and
implement complex digital systems or to fulfil a technician role in industry.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
514
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit, students will be able to:
LO1 Design combinational logic circuits for suitable applications
LO2 Design sequential logic circuits for suitable applications
LO3 Implement combinational and sequential logic circuits using a hardware
description language (HDL) software package
LO4 Test combinational and sequential logic designs using a field-programmable
gate array (FPGA) development board.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
515
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Design combinational logic circuits for suitable applications
Introduction to digital electronics:
Analogue (continuous) signals, digital representation, and the requirement
for conversion between these forms; examples of analogue and digital data
(e.g. temperature, digital music player, digital photography)
Need for processing, storing and communication of digital data (e.g. computers,
mobile phones).
Combinational logic gates:
Symbols, truth tables, Boolean equations, and function of logic gates: AND, OR,
NOT, XOR, NAND, and NOR
Application of relevant numerical skills (Binary, dotted decimal notation) required
to meet the defined specifications.
Techniques used in combinational logic circuit design:
Boolean algebra, De Morgan’s theorems, Karnaugh mapping
Combinational logic circuits involving up to 4 inputs and a maximum of 10 gates
before minimisation
Optimisation of combinational logic circuits using the techniques listed above;
circuits using basic logic gates to achieve more complex functions (e.g. adders,
decoders, encoders, multiplexing and demultiplexing (MUX/DEMUX), parity
checking, simple logic controls).
Introduction to digital technologies:
Use of complementary metal–oxide–semiconductor (CMOS) and transistor–
transistor logic (TTL): speed, voltages, fan-out, power consumption, speed–power
product, packing density
Recent silicon technologies
Concept of propagation delay and its implications; timing analysis of
combinational circuits.
Simple testing methodologies:
Instrumentation (e.g. logic probe, oscilloscope, etc.)
Simulation software (e.g. NI Multisim).
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
516
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO2 Design sequential logic circuits for suitable applications
Sequential logic design:
Sequential building blocks: latches; D, T and JK flip-flops
Set-up and hold times – implication on maximum clock speed
Asynchronous and synchronous systems (e.g. compare synchronous and
asynchronous counters)
Suitable sequential circuits built from D or JK flip-flops to include shift registers,
synchronous counters, and sequence generators (up to and including 4 bits)
State diagrams to describe counters and sequence generators.
Testing sequential designs:
Use of oscilloscope (e.g. measuring clock frequency, propagation delays)
Use of simulator (e.g. NI Multisim).
LO3 Implement combinational and sequential logic circuits for simple
applications using a hardware description language (HDL) software
package
HDL:
Languages (VHDL and Verilog) – choose one to use
Structures: entity and architecture, and key words associated with the chosen
language
Behavioural architecture.
Implementing combinational logic in HDL:
Entry of schematic and HDL (e.g. VHDL, Verilog) into HDL development software
(e.g. Quartus (Intel), ISE Design Suite (Xilinx))
Compilation and debugging techniques
Suitable combinational logic circuits (e.g. adders, decoders, comparators,
encoders, seven-segment display encoding, MUX/DEMUX, parity checking,
simple logic controls).
Implementing sequential logic in HDL:
Suitable sequential logic circuits (e.g. shift registers, counters and sequence
generators) written in HDL using dataflow and/or behavioural architecture.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
517
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO4 Test combinational and sequential logic designs using a field-
programmable gate array (FPGA) development board.
Field-programmable gate array (FPGA) technology:
Introduction to structure and complexity of current FPGA technology.
Simulation:
Use of HDL development tools to simulate combinational and sequential
designs.
FPGA development boards:
Structure of a typical development board
Pin assignment, downloading, simulation, testing and verifying combinational
and sequential designs
Ensure use of tools and techniques for secure operations and in testing network
designs.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
518
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Design combinational logic circuits for suitable
applications
P1 Explain the different M1 Analyse the different D1 Evaluate the different
digital technologies used to digital technologies used to digital technologies used to
implement digital circuits. implement digital circuits implement digital circuits.
P2 Design suitable M2 Design suitable D2 Evaluate the design of
combinational logic circuits, combinational logic circuits, suitable combinational logic
making mostly accurate use making accurate use of circuits, by accurately
of Boolean algebra and Boolean algebra, De optimising them.
Karnaugh maps. Morgan’s theorems and
Karnaugh maps.
LO2 Design sequential logic circuits for suitable
applications
P3 Design suitable M3 Design suitable D3 Design optimised suitable
sequential logic circuits, sequential logic circuits, sequential logic circuits, using
using mostly accurate state using techniques appropriate techniques
diagrams. accurately. accurately.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
519
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Pass Merit Distinction
LO3 Implement combinational and sequential logic circuits
for simple applications using a hardware description
language (HDL) software package LO3 and LO4
P4 Implement, using M4 Implement, using both D4 Evaluate the correct
schematic entry, two schematic entry and HDL, operation and improved
suitable combinational and two suitable combinational performance of at least two
two suitable sequential logic and two suitable sequential suitable combinational and
circuits. logic circuits. two sequential logic circuits,
comparing the results from
accurate HDL simulations
and FPGA hardware
functional tests.
LO4 Test combinational and sequential logic designs using
a field-programmable gate array (FPGA) development
board.
P5 Verify the correct
M5 Verify the correct
operation of two suitable
operation and improved
combinational and two
performance of two
suitable sequential logic suitable combinational and
circuits using simulation two suitable sequential
and safe functional tests logic circuits using
on FPGA hardware. simulation and safe
functional tests on
P6 Explain, using the HDL
FPGA hardware.
simulation and FPGA
hardware test results, M6 Analyse, using the HDL
the correct operation of at simulation and FPGA
least three logic circuits, hardware test results,
combinational and the correct operation and
sequential. improved performance of
at least three logic circuits,
combinational and
sequential.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
520
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Floyd, T.L. (2015) Digital Fundamentals . 11th Ed. Pearson.
Kleitz, W. (2014) Digital Electronics: A Practical Approach with VHDL . 9th Ed.
Pearson New International Edition. Pearson Education.
Mano, M.M. and Ciletti, M.D. (2022) Digital Design: With an Introduction to the Verilog
HDL, VHDL and SystemVerilog . 6th Ed. Pearson.
Short, K. (2014) VHDL for Engineers . Pearson New International Edition.
Pearson Education.
Websites
http://www.intel.com Intel
‘Intel® FPGA Academic Program’
(General reference)
http://www.xilinx.com Xilinx
‘Xilinx University Program’
(General reference)
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4019: Electrical and Electronic Principles
Unit 4020: Digital Principles
Unit 4022: Electronic Circuits and Devices
Unit 4064: Analogue and Digital Electronics
Unit 5019: Further Electrical, Electronic and Digital Principles
Unit 5043: Digital System Design.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
521
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025