Unit 4085: Mechatronic Systems in
Manufacturing
Unit code K/617/3945
Unit level 4
Credit value 15
Introduction
Mechatronic systems are a fusion of different engineering disciplines including
electrical, electronic and mechanical engineering, and control and computer
systems engineering. This integration of technologies enables greater automation in
manufacturing, leading to time saving, increased output and cost savings. Examples
of mechatronic systems include integrated automated production lines; measuring,
testing and calibration systems for quality control; and closed-loop control systems
for process optimisation.
Topics within this unit include the evolution, design and characteristics of mechatronic
systems; sensors, transducers and actuators; closed-loop feedback systems;
programmable control devices; interfacing; system integration design; and functional
safety requirements.
On successful completion of this unit students will be able to explain the design and
operational characteristics of a mechatronic system, identify and apply a range of
sensors, transducers and actuators, evaluate programmable control devices and
design an integrated mechatronic system for a manufacturing specification.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
650
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Explain the design and operational characteristics of a manufacturing
mechatronic system
LO2 Investigate a range of mechatronic system components and technologies
LO3 Review the operation, selection and interfacing of programmable control
devices within a manufacturing mechatronic system
LO4 Design a mechatronic system for a manufacturing application.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
651
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Explain the design and operational characteristics of a manufacturing
mechatronic system
Origins, evolution and applications:
History and early development; evolution from purely mechanical to integrated
mechatronic systems
Industrial robots and alternative applications, e.g. vehicle driver assistance
systems, medical applications, domestic goods, space exploration, sports and
leisure systems.
Elements of a mechatronic system:
Physical system modelling; sensors and actuators; control and feedback signals;
data acquisition and processing; computerised control; overview of open and
closed-loop control systems.
Mechatronic system integration:
Conventional systems versus mechatronic systems for manufacturing and
inspection stages; high-performance versus lower cost; interpreting system
requirements; understanding system constraints; selection and placement of
sensors; interface matching; reliability and safety.
LO2 Investigate a range of mechatronic system components and technologies
Analogue and digital signals:
Continuous versus discrete signals; voltage (0-10 v) versus current (4-20 mA)
Amplification and attenuation, sources of noise, filtering, Analog-to-Digital
Converter (ADC) resolution, pulse width modulation.
Sensors and transducers:
Temperature, light level, force, pressure, speed, position, proximity, sound, flow,
humidity, vibration, voltage, current
Interpreting data sheets; selection criteria; calibration and testing.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
652
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Actuators:
Types: linear, rotary, hydraulic, chain, pneumatics
Applications: valves, motors, servomechanism (servo), micro-positioning motors
Interpreting data sheets; selection criteria; mounting, force, torque, enclosure
protection
National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA) and International
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC).
LO3 Review the operation, selection and interfacing of programmable control
devices within a manufacturing mechatronic system
Microcomputer system architecture:
CPU, memory, data, program, input/output (I/O), data and address bus.
Programmable logic controllers (PLCs):
Selection criteria: size, functionality, flexibility, performance, connectivity,
security, manufacturers
Programming: IEC 61131-3 Languages, software tools
Advantages and disadvantages of PLCs
Interfacing to a mechatronic system.
Microcontrollers:
Selection criteria: processor, speed, memory, power, range of I/O
Programming languages: C, C++, assembly and alternative third-party and
open-source software
Software tools: debuggers, emulators, simulators
Advantages and disadvantages of microcontrollers
Interfacing to a mechatronic system.
Alternative programmable control devices:
Programmable automation controller (PAC), industrial PC based robot
controllers, remote telemetry units (RTU), field programmable gate array (FPGA).
Functional Safety:
International Engineering Consortium (IEC) standard IEC61508
Hazard and risk assessment (HARA)
Safety integrity levels (SILs) of programmable devices.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
653
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO4 Design a mechatronic system for a manufacturing application.
Design methodologies:
Identification of skill sets required by team members for a mechatronic
system project
Interpreting requirements to develop concept design and specification
VDI 2206 (guideline for the design of mechatronic systems): general cycle of
problem solving on the micro level; the V-shaped model on the macro level
Process modules for repeating design steps; advanced design modelling and
simulating system behaviour.
Functional Safety:
International safety standards: ISO 13849-1, IEC 61061,2006/42/EC, IEC 618005-2
European Machinery Directive 2006/42/EC for safety-related parts of a control
system (SRP/CS), integrating safety into the design process
Hazard and risk assessment: hazard and operability study (HAZOP),
failure modes and effects analysis (FMEA), fault tree analysis (FTA)
Use of multi-function safety relays.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
654
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Explain the design and operational characteristics of a
manufacturing mechatronic system
P1 Describe the key M1 Analyse how D1 Evaluate the operation
elements of a mechatronic system integration has of a mechatronic system
system. transformed conventional within a manufacturing
manufacturing mechatronic environment characterizing
P2 Explain the origins,
systems. the different technologies
evolution and benefits of
and interfaces.
mechatronic systems in
manufacturing.
LO2 Investigate a range of mechatronic system
components and technologies
P3 Identify the types of M2 Justify a range of D2 Evaluate types of signals
sensors and transducers instrumentation devices for used in instrumentation
used within a manufacturing a given mechatronic system devices and a range of
mechatronic system. design specification. signal processing techniques
used when integrating
P4 Identify the types of
mechatronic systems.
actuators used within a
manufacturing mechatronic
system.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
655
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Pass Merit Distinction
LO3 Review the operation, selection and interfacing of
programmable control devices within a manufacturing
mechatronic system
P5 Describe the M3 Analyse the operation D3 Evaluate a programmable
characteristics of and interfacing of a range control device for a given
programmable logic of programmable control mechatronic system
controllers and applications devices used in application with
within manufacturing manufacturing consideration to
mechatronic systems. mechatronic systems. Functional Safety.
P6 Describe the M4 Analyse the range of
characteristics of embedded programming languages
microcontrollers and and software tools
applications within available for programmable
manufacturing control devices used within
mechatronic systems. manufacturing mechatronic
systems.
LO4 Design a mechatronic system for a manufacturing
application.
P7 Interpret a set of
M5 Assess compliance, D4 Justify the selection
requirements to a
safety and risk of components and
specification for a
management issues technologies for the
manufacturing present in the design development of a
mechatronic system. solution. manufacturing
mechatronic system.
P8 Produce a block diagram
to illustrate the design of a
manufacturing mechatronic
system, documenting
appropriate design
methodology.
P9 Design a mechatronic
system based on a given
specification and block
diagram.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
656
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Alciatore D. (2018 ) Introduction to Mechatronics and Measurement Systems . 5th Ed.
McGraw Hill.
Bolton, W. (2015) Mechatronics. 6th Ed: Electronic Control Systems in Mechanical and
Electrical Engineering . Harlow: Pearson Education.
Clarence, W. de S. (2010) Mechatronics: A Foundation Course . Boca Raton,
Florida: CRC Press.
Tacchini M. (2023) Functional Safety of Machinery: How to Apply ISO 13849-1
and IEC 62061 . Wiley.
Websites
http://www.inderscience.com Inderscience Publishers
International Journal of Mechatronics
and Manufacturing Systems
International Journal of Automation
and Control
International Journal of Mechatronics
and Automation
http://www.controleng.com Control Engineering
Integrating safety into engineering into
mechatronic design
Top-down strategies for innovation in
mechatronic machine engineering
When to use multi-function safety relays
(General reference)
http://www.howtomechatronics.com How to Mechatronics
‘How it works’
(Briefings)
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
657
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



http://www.vdi.eu Association of German Engineers
VDI-Standard VDI 2206:
Design Methodology for Mechatronic
Systems
(General reference)
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4033: Programmable Logic Controllers (PLCs)
Unit 4068: Industrial Robots
Unit 4080: Material Handling Systems.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
658
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025