Unit 5001: Research Project
Unit Code: J/615/1502
Level: 5
Credits: 30
Introduction
Completing a piece of research is an opportunity for students to showcase their
intellect and talents. It integrates knowledge with different skills and abilities that
may not have been assessed previously, which may include seeking out and reviewing
original research papers, designing their own experimental work, solving problems as
they arise, managing time, finding new ways of analysing and presenting data, and
writing an extensive report. Research can always be a challenge but one that can be
immensely fulfilling, an experience that goes beyond a mark or a grade, but extends
into long-lasting areas of personal and professional development.
This unit introduces students to the skills necessary to deliver a complex,
independently conducted research project that fits within an engineering/
manufacturing context.
On successful completion of this unit, students will be able to deliver a complex
and independent research project in line with the original objectives, explain the
critical thinking skills associated with solving engineering/manufacturing problems,
consider multiple perspectives in reaching a balanced and justifiable conclusion, and
communicate effectively a research project’s outcome. Therefore, students develop
skills such as critical thinking, analysis, reasoning, interpretation, decision-making,
information literacy, information and communication technology literacy, innovation,
conflict resolution, creativity, collaboration, adaptability, and written and oral
communication.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
840
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Examine the preliminary stages involved in the creation of an
engineering/manufacturing research project
LO2 Examine the analytical techniques used to work on all stages of the project and
strategies required to overcome the challenges involved in a research project
LO3 Reflect on the impact the research experience could have in enhancing
personal or group performance within an engineering/manufacturing context
LO4 Explore the communications approach used for the preparation and
presentation of the research project’s outcomes.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
841
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Examine the preliminary stages involved in the creation of an
engineering/manufacturing research project
Setting up the research preliminaries:
Project proposal (note: relevant to the subject of study)
Developing a research question(s)
Selection of project approach and use of relevant research methods
(e.g., statistical analysis, surveys, etc.)
Identification of project supervisor
Estimation of resource requirements, including possible sources of funding
Setting key project objectives, goals, and rationale
Stakeholder requirements if any
Development of project specification.
LO2 Examine the analytical techniques used to work on all stages of the project
and strategies required to overcome the challenges involved in a research
project
Investigative skills and project strategies:
Key research methods and rationale, primary and secondary research
Selecting the method(s) of collecting data
Data analysis and interpreting findings
Literature review (e.g., journals and published papers)
Engaging with technical literature (e.g., industry case studies,
engineering/manufacturing data reports, professional body publications)
Technical depth
Multi-perspectives analysis
Independent thinking
Statement of resources required for project completion
Potential risk issues, including health and safety, environmental and commercial
Project management and key milestones.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
842
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO3 Reflect on the impact the research experience could have in enhancing
personal or group performance within an engineering/manufacturing
context
Research purpose:
Detailed statement of project aims
Relevance of the research
Benefits and beneficiaries of the research
Professional, legal, social, and ethical aspects of research.
LO4 Explore the communications approach used for the preparation and
presentation of the research project’s outcomes
Reporting the research:
Reporting research undertaken, appropriate use of a suitable referencing
method including citation
Preparation of a final project report (including structure, professional format,
research vocabulary)
Project oral presentation such as using short presentations to discuss the work
with representative audiences (e.g., professional discussions) and conclusions
Project written presentation
Poster development and other equivalent methods.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
843
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Examine the preliminary stages involved in the creation
of an engineering/manufacturing research project
P1 Produce a research M1 Analyse the project D1 Produce a
project proposal that clearly specification and identify comprehensive project
defines a research question any project risks. proposal that evaluates
or hypothesis. and justifies the rationale
for the research.
P2 Examine the key project
objectives, the resulting
goals, and rationale.
LO2 Examine the analytical techniques used to work on all
stages of the project and strategies required to overcome the
challenges involved in a research project
P3 Conduct a literature M2 Analyse the strategies D2 Critically analyse
review of published material, used to overcome the literature sources utilised,
either in hard copy or challenges involved in the data analysis conducted,
electronically, that is relevant literature review stage. and strategies to deal
to your research project. with challenges.
M3 Discuss merits, limitations,
P4 Examine appropriate and pitfalls of approaches to
research methods and data collection and analysis.
approaches to primary
and secondary research.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
844
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Pass Merit Distinction
LO3 Reflect on the impact the research experience could have
in enhancing personal or group performance within an
engineering/manufacturing context
P5 Reflect on the M4 Evaluate the benefits from D3 Critically evaluate how
effectiveness and the impact the findings of the research the research experience
the experience has had upon conducted, and the impact enhances personal or
enhancing personal or group on CPD. group performance
performance. within an engineering/
manufacturing context.
LO4 Explore the communications approach used for the
preparation and presentation of the research project’s
outcomes
P6 Explore the different
M5 Evaluate how the D4 Critically reflect how
types of communication
communication approach the audience for whom
approaches that can be
meets research project the research was
used to present the research outcomes and objectives. conducted influenced the
outcomes. communication approach
used for the preparation
P7 Communicate research
and presentation of the
outcomes in a professional
research project’s
manner for the intended
outcomes.
audience.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
845
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Belegundu A.D. and Chandrupatla T.R. (2019) Optimization Concepts and Applications
in Engineering. 3rd Ed. Cambridge University Press.
Breach M. (2008) Dissertation Writing for Engineers and Scientists. Student Edition.
Pearson Education Limited.
Cassel K. W. (2021) Matrix, Numerical, and Optimization Methods in Science and
Engineering. Cambridge University Press.
Jana A.K. (2023) Numerical Methods in Engineering: Theory and Process Applications.
Cambridge University Press.
Vaughan G.D., and Smith I.M. (2006) Numerical methods for engineers. CRC Press.
KIRKUP L. (2019) Experimental Methods for Science and Engineering Students:
An Introduction to the Analysis and Presentation of Data. 2nd Ed. Cambridge
University Press.
Leong E.C., Lee-Hsia C.H. and Wee Ong K.K. (2015) Guide to Research Projects for
Engineering Students: Planning, Writing, and Presenting . Apple Academic Press Inc.
Oberlender G.D. (2014) Project Management for Engineering and Construction .
3rd Ed. McGraw-Hill Education.
Qiu M., QIU H., and Zeng Y. (2022) Research and Technical Writing for Science and
Engineering. CRC Press.
Thiel D.V. (2014) Research Methods for Engineers. Cambridge University Press.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
846
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
American Journal of Engineering Research
Arabian Journal for Science & Engineering
Scientific Reports
Engineering Reports
Science Progress
Cell Reports Physical Science
Engineering Research Express
European Journal of Engineering and Technology Research
IETE journal of research
Indian Journal of Engineering
International Journal of Indian Research
International Journal of Engineering Research in Africa
International Journal of Engineering Research & Technology
Journal of Engineering in Industrial Research
Journal of Engineering Research
Journal of Engineering Research and Sciences (JENRS)
Journal of Engineering Research and Reports
London Journal of Engineering Research
The Journal of Engineering Research [TJER]
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4004: Managing a Professional Engineering Project
Unit 5002: Professional Engineering Management
Unit 5041: Engineering project.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
847
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025