Unit 5002: Professional Engineering
Management
Unit Code: F/651/0809
Level: 5
Credits: 15
Introduction
Engineers are professionals who can design, develop, manufacture, construct,
operate, and maintain the physical infrastructure and content of the world we live in.
They do this by using their academic knowledge and practical experience, in a safe,
effective, and sustainable manner, even when faced with a high degree of technical
complexity.
The aim of this unit is to continue building up on the knowledge gained in Unit 4004:
Managing a Professional Engineering Project or Unit 4062 Professional Engineering
Practice , to provide students with the professional standards for engineers and
to guide them on how to develop the range of employability skills needed by
professional engineers.
Among the topics included in this unit are: engineering strategy and services delivery
planning, the role of sustainability, Total Quality Management (TQM), engineering
management tools, managing people, and becoming a professional engineer.
On successful completion of this unit, students will be able to construct a coherent
engineering services delivery plan to meet the requirements of a sector-specific
organisation or business. They will display a personal commitment to professional
standards and obligations to society, the engineering/manufacturing profession,
and the environment.
This unit is assessed by a Pearson-set theme. The project brief will be set by the
centre, based on a theme provided by Pearson (this will change annually). The theme
and chosen project within the theme will enable students to explore and examine a
relevant and current topical aspect of professional engineering/manufacturing sector.
*Please refer to the accompanying Pearson-set The Guide and the Theme
Release document for further support and guidance on the delivery of the
Pearson-set unit.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
848
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Evaluate risk management theories and practices employed in
engineering/manufacturing projects
LO2 Produce an engineering/manufacturing services delivery plan that meets the
requirements of a sector-specific organisation
LO3 Develop effective leadership, individual and group communication skills
LO4 Demonstrate personal commitment to professional standards and obligations
to society, the engineering profession, and the environment.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
849
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Evaluate risk management theories and practices employed in
engineering/manufacturing projects
The engineering/manufacturing business environment:
Organisational structures and functional elements
Strategic planning and deployment
Engineering strategy and services delivery planning
The role of sustainability and environmental efficiency in decision making
Total Quality Management (TQM)
Logistics and supply chain management
Financial data, information, storage, and data management systems
New product development strategies
Legal obligations and corporate responsibility.
Risk evaluation in engineering/manufacturing projects:
Overview of risk analysis, assessment, and management
Key theories, methods, and applications (e.g., machinery, manufacturing,
power plants, supply chains, etc.)
Case studies – example uses of Decision Tree Analysis, What If Analysis,
Event Tree Analysis, Fault Tree Analysis
Risk governance, safety, data sources, risk-informed decision-making,
standards (e.g. ISO 31000: Risk management), security, and life-cycle use of risk.
Engineering relationships:
The relationship between engineering and financial management, marketing,
purchasing, quality assurance, and public relations.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
850
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO2 Produce an engineering/manufacturing services delivery plan that meets
the requirements of a sector-specific organisation
Management tools/software for engineering/manufacturing sector:
Problem analysis and decision-making, change management, performance
management, product and process improvement, scheduling matrix, project
management (including use of tools/techniques e.g. SWOT (strengths,
weaknesses, opportunities, threats) analysis, stakeholder matrices, risk mapping,
radar charts and summary risk profiles), and earned value analysis.
Services Delivery Plan:
Detailed task breakdown
Challenges–Planned and unforeseen
Internal and external influence
Impact on other services/users/stakeholders
Cost implications
Responsibilities.
LO3 Develop effective leadership, individual, and group communication skills
Managing people:
Describe the most effective leadership styles
Techniques to effectively manage teams (e.g., clear vision, systematic,
transparent, delegation, collaboration remote working, etc.)
Individual/team CPD with opportunities for upskilling/reskilling (e.g., digital
competencies and sustainability goals/frameworks) and ownership
Impact of effectively managing people
Motivation theories
Coaching and mentoring.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
851
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Steps to follow for leading effective meetings and delivering effective presentations:
Meeting management skills
Communication skills: Listening, non-verbal communication, clarity and brevity,
friendliness, confidence, empathy, open-mindedness, respect, feedback, and
picking the right medium
Communication with groups: Group expectations; communication formats
(e.g. written reports, verbal, electronic, social media, data metrics); dealing with
reactions and disagreements; allowing and encouraging participation; acting on
agreed outcomes; negative communication; motivating disillusioned colleagues;
persuasion and negotiation
Human error evaluation
Coaching and mentoring .
Workplace considerations:
Human factors (organisational, environmental, and job factors), influence and
impact individual characteristics, performance, and behaviours in the workplace
Systematic and proactive approach to problem-solving
Safety-first culture, policies and procedures, and compliance with legislative and
organisation health, safety, and environmental requirements
Equality and diversity: Ensuring work produced and the approach to work is
inclusive and takes proper, account of equality of opportunity and the diverse
nature of the population.
LO4 Demonstrate personal commitment to professional standards and
obligations to society, the engineering profession, and the environment
Becoming a professional engineer:
Engineering social responsibility
Importance of being active and up to date with the engineering profession,
new developments and discoveries
Methods of Continuing Professional Development (CPD). Work ethics: positive,
professional, respectful, trusting, and ethical working relationships. Lead
by example. Holistic stakeholder engagement. Ownership of professional
development and up-to-date with subject/sector developments (e.g., digital
competencies, sustainability goals/frameworks).
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
852
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Evaluate risk management theories and practices
employed in engineering/manufacturing projects
P1 Discuss any two risk M1 Analyse the application D1 Critically evaluate the
evaluation theories of risk management theories challenges encountered
associated with the for a given engineering/ when meeting the
management of engineering/ manufacturing context. requirements for
manufacturing projects. successfully managing
engineering activities, with
P2 Evaluate risk assessment
justified recommendations
methods and practices that
to overcome these
impact the successful
challenges.
management of engineering/
manufacturing activities.
LO2 Produce an engineering/manufacturing services delivery
plan that meets the requirements of a sector-specific
organisation
P3 Produce an engineering M2 Evaluate how each step of D2 Critically evaluate
services delivery plan, the delivery plan developed contingencies that might
applying the appropriate meets the requirements of a prevent the delivery
sector-specific requirements. sector-specific organisation. plan from meeting the
requirements of a sector-
P4 Determine the
specific organisation.
engineering management
tools needed for designing
an engineering/
manufacturing services
delivery plan.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
853
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Pass Merit Distinction
LO3 Develop effective leadership, individual and group
communication skills
P5 Develop the steps for M3 Evaluate leadership styles D3 Critically evaluate
effective persuasion and and effective communication effective ways to coach
negotiation. skills using specific examples and mentor disillusioned
in an organisational context. colleagues or a poorly
P6 Explain the steps for
performing team.
managing effective group
meetings.
P7 Outline the steps to
deliver an effective
presentation.
LO4 Demonstrate personal commitment to professional
standards and obligations to society, the engineering
profession, and the environment
P8 Examine the context
M4 Summarise the D4 Provide justifications
of social responsibility for
engineering profession’s as to why it is necessary to
scientists and engineers.
ethical standards and be active and up to date
patterns of behaviour. with the engineering
P9 Demonstrate the ways
profession’s new
by which an engineer
developments and
can engage in continuing
discoveries.
professional development.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
854
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Bahr N.J. (2015) System Safety Engineering and Risk Assessment – A Practical Approach .
Second Edition. CRC Press
Burns, B. (2014) Managing Change . 6th Ed. Pearson.
Challender J. (2022) Professional Ethics in Construction and Engineering. Wiley.
Covello V.T. (2021) Communicating in Risk, Crisis, and High Stress Situations:
Evidence-Based Strategies and Practice . Wiley.
Dearden, H. (2013) Professional Engineering Practice: Reflections on the Role of the
Professional Engineer. CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform.
El-Reedy M.A. (2021) Offshore Projects and Engineering Management .
1st Edition. Elsevier.
Karten, N. (2010) Presentation Skills for Technical Professionals . IT Governance Ltd.
Kerzner H. (2022) Project Management: A Systems Approach to Planning, Scheduling,
and Controlling. 13th Edition, Wiley.
Kiran D.R. (2022) Principles of Economics and Management for Manufacturing
Engineering. Elsevier.
Kong K. (2019) Professional Discourse. Cambridge University Press.
Lock, D. (2013) Project Management . 10th Ed. Routledge.
Muzio D., Sundeep A. and Kirkpatrick I. (2020) Professional Occupations and
Organizations. Cambridge University Press.
Rausand M. and Stein Haugen S. (2020) Risk Assessment: Theory, Methods, and
Applications . John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Temple T.J. and Ladyman M.K. (2022) Challenges in Risk Analysis for Science and
Engineering . IOP Publishing Ltd.
Wilbers S. (2022) Persuasive Communication for Science and Technology Leaders:
Writing and Speaking with Confidence . Wiley.
Wright I. (2012) Risk Evaluation (Engineering Design Book 1) . Kindle Edition.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
855
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
Advanced Engineering Informatics
Advances in Engineering Software
Applications in Engineering Science
Control Engineering Practice
Cleaner Engineering and Technology
Engineering
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
Engineering Management
Engineering Management Journal
Frontiers of Engineering Management
IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management
Journal of Engineering and Technology Management
Journal of Management & Organization
Journal of Professional Issues in Engineering Education and Practice
Microelectronic Engineering
Probability in the Engineering and Information Sciences
Probabilistic Engineering Mechanics
Results in Engineering
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4004: Managing a Professional Engineering Project
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
856
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025