Unit 5003: Advanced Mechanical
Principles
Unit Code: K/651/0810
Level: 5
Credits: 15
Introduction
A mechanical engineer is required to have an advanced knowledge of most of the
machinery used within the engineering industry, and should understand the physical
laws that influence their operation.
The aim of this unit is to continue covering the topics discussed in Unit 4008:
Mechanical Principles and other higher-level topics such as:
Poisson’s Ratio and typical values of common materials; the relationship between the
elastic constants such as Bulk Modulus, Modulus of Elasticity, Modulus of Rigidity; the
relationship between bending moment, slope, and deflection in beams; calculating
the slope and deflection for loaded beams using Macaulay’s method; analysing the
stresses in thin-walled pressure vessels; and stresses in thick-walled cylinders,
flat and v-section belt drive theory.
On successful completion of this unit students will be able to have more advanced
knowledge of mechanical principles including behavioural characteristics of materials
subjected to complex loading, the strength of loaded beams and pressurised vessels,
specifications of power transmission system elements, and operational constraints of
dynamic systems.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
857
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Determine the behavioural characteristics of materials subjected to
complex loading
LO2 Assess the strength of loaded beams and pressurised vessels
LO3 Analyse the specifications of power transmission system elements
LO4 Examine operational constraints of dynamic systems.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
858
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Determine the behavioural characteristics of materials subjected to
complex loading
Characteristics of materials:
Definition of Poisson’s Ratio and typical values of metals, plastics and composite
materials
The relationship between the elastic constants such as Bulk Modulus,
Modulus of Elasticity, Modulus of Rigidity and Poisson’s Ratio
Characteristics of two-dimensional and three-dimensional loading
Calculation of volumetric strain and volume changes
Concept of principal stress and strain
Failure criteria for ductile and brittle materials
Use of problem-solving tools within the context such as Root Cause Analysis
(RCA) Process Failure Modes Effects Analysis (PFMEA), Fishbone, and Practical
Problem Solving (PPS) and Advanced Product Quality Planning (APQP).
LO2 Assess the strength of loaded beams and pressurised vessels
Strength:
The relationship between bending moment, slope and deflection in beams
Calculating the slope and deflection for loaded beams using Macaulay’s method
Analysing the stresses in thin-walled pressure vessels and stresses in
thick-walled cylinders
Use of computer simulations to model the behaviour of beams.
LO3 Analyse the specifications of power transmission system elements
Specifications:
Flat and v-section belt drive theory
Operation of friction clutches with uniform pressure and uniform wear theories
Bending and contact stress in geared systems
Principles of both epicyclic and differential gearing, and the torque required to
accelerate these systems
Areas of failure when transmitting power mechanically.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
859
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO4 Examine operational constraints of dynamic systems
Operational constraints:
Design of mechanical components to meet operating specifications,
displacement and velocity
Operating principles of flywheels to store mechanical energy
Balancing of rotating mass systems
Single degree of freedom (DOF) free and damped vibration.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
860
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Determine the behavioural characteristics of materials
subjected to complex loading
P1 Discuss the relationship M1 Assess the effects D1 Critique the behavioural
between the elastic constants. of volumetric thermal characteristics of materials
expansion and subjected to complex
P2 Illustrate the effects of
contraction on isotropic loading.
two-dimensional and three-
materials.
dimensional loading on the
dimensions of a given material.
P3 Determine the volumetric
strain and change in volume
due to three-dimensional
loading.
LO2 Assess the strength of loaded beams and pressurised
vessels
P4 Evaluate the variation of M2 Refine the selection of D2 Justify the choice of a
slope and deflection along a suitable size universal suitably sized universal
a simply supported beam. beam from appropriate beam, using appropriate
data tables which computer software to model
P5 Assess the principal stresses
conforms to given design the application by explaining
that occur in a thin-walled
specifications for slope any assumptions that could
cylindrical pressure vessel
and deflection. affect the selection.
and a pressurised thick-walled
cylinder.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
861
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Pass Merit Distinction
LO3 Analyse the specifications of power transmission system
elements
P6 Discuss the initial tension M3 Critically analyse both D3 Evaluate the conditions
requirements for the operation the uniform wear and needed for an epicyclic gear
of a v-belt drive. uniform pressure theories train to become a
of friction clutches for differential, showing how
P7 Analyse the force
their effectiveness in a differential works in this
requirements to engage a
theoretical calculations. application.
friction clutch in a mechanical
system.
P8 Analyse the holding torque
and power transmitted through
epicyclic gear trains.
LO4 Examine operational constraints of dynamic systems
P9 Examine the profiles of both D4 Critically evaluate
M4 Evaluate the effects
radial plate and cylindrical cams different choices of
of misalignment of shafts
that will achieve a specified mechanical systems that
and the use of problem-
motion. solving tools to prevent induce specified motion,
problems from occurring. including the advantages
P10 Determine the mass of
and disadvantages of each
a flywheel needed to keep a
application.
machine speed within specified
limits.
P11 Investigate the balancing
masses required to obtain
dynamic equilibrium in a
system.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
862
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Bird J. and Ross C. (2020) Mechanical Engineering Principles . 4th Ed. Routledge.
Childs P.R.N. (2021) Mechanical Design: Theory and Applications. 3rd Ed.
Butterworth-Heinemann.
Hibbeler R.C. (2020) Engineering Mechanics: Dynamics and Statics. SI Edition.
14th Ed. Pearson.
Juvinall R.C. and Marshek K.M. (2020) Fundamentals of Machine Component Design.
7th Ed. Wiley.
Tooley M. and Dingle L. (2020) Engineering Science: For Foundation
Degree and Higher National . 2nd Ed. Routledge.
Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
Applied Mechanics Reviews
Archive of Rational Mechanics and Analysis
Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering
Frontiers in Mechanical Engineering
International Journal of Engineering Science
International Journal of Mechanical Sciences
Journal of Machine Design
Journal of Mechanical Engineering
Journal of Mechanical Science and Technology
Mechanics Based Design of Structures and Machines
Mechanical Engineering Journal
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4008: Mechanical Principles.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
863
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025