Unit 5004: Computational Modelling in
Virtual Engineering
Unit Code: L/651/0858
Level: 5
Credits: 15
Introduction
The work of an engineer increasingly involves the use of powerful software modelling
tools (virtual modelling). These tools allow us to predict potential manufacturing
difficulties, suggest how a product or component is likely to behave in service, and
undertake rapid and low-cost design iteration and optimisation, to reduce costs,
pre-empt failure and enhance performance.
This unit introduces students to the application of relevant Computer Aided Design
(CAD) and analysis engineering tools in contemporary engineering. They will learn
about standards, regulations, and legal compliance within the context of engineering.
Topics included in this unit are: dimensioning and tolerances, standardisation and
regulatory compliance (BS, ASTM, ISO, etc.), material properties and selection,
manufacturing processes, 2D, 3D, CAD, solid modelling, one-dimensional and
multi-dimensional problems, meshing and boundary conditions, and the finite
element and volume methods.
On successful completion of this unit students will learn about computational fluid
dynamics (CFD) simulations, finite element models, faults in the application of
simulation techniques and the modelling method and data accuracy.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
864
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Explore the capabilities and limitations of computer-based models in meeting
design fundamentals and their use in solving problems in engineering.
LO2 Develop finite element model(s) in order to find and solve potential structural
or performance issues.
LO3 Perform CFD simulations to evaluate pressure and velocity distributions within
an engineering setting.
LO4 Discuss faults in the application of simulation techniques to evaluate the
modelling method and data accuracy.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
865
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Explore the capabilities and limitations of computer-based models in
meeting design fundamentals and their use in solving problems in
engineering
Engineering design fundamentals:
Dimensioning and tolerances
Standardisation and regulatory compliance (BS, ASTM, ISO, etc.)
How to manufacture and what to manufacture:
Material properties and selection
Manufacturing processes: capability, cost issues and selection
Relevance of Industry 4.0 tools/trends in support of solving engineering
problems and facilitate seamless systems integration.
Design tools:
2D and 3D CAD
Solid modelling
File types, export and compatibility
Case studies involving use of various computer-based models for Engineering
problem solving.
Interpretation and presentation of results through a series of guided exercises:
Results obtained, comparison of data, benefits and limitations; exploit uses of
databases, data formats and data analytics
Generalisation of provided information, recommendations on current and future
applications
Use of documentation within the context e.g. job cards/build records, 2D and
3D drawing/models, bill of materials (BOM), cost analysis reports, compliance
reports, standard operating instructions (SOIs), standard process instructions
(SPIs), engineering query notifications (EQNs), drawing query notifications
(DQNs).
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
866
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO2 Develop finite element model(s) in order to find and solve potential
structural or performance issues
Fundamentals of FEM (Finite Element Modelling):
Meshing, nodes and element types
Types of boundary conditions
FEM and FEA; applications, advantages, and limitations.
Finite element formulation:
One-dimensional problems, Multi-dimensional problems, Beams.
Finite element method:
Define the problem: simplify an engineering problem into a problem that can be
solved using FEA
Develop models: define material properties and boundary conditions; choose
appropriate functions, formulate equations, solve equations, visualise and
explain the results.
LO3 Perform CFD simulations to evaluate pressure and velocity distributions
within an engineering setting
Fundamentals of CFD (Computational Fluid Dynamics):
CFD and the finite volume method background
Meshing and boundary conditions
Applications, advantages and limitations of CFD.
CFD simulation and analysis:
Apply CFD to simple design/aerodynamics problems: define the problem,
provide initial boundary conditions for the problem, set-up a physical model,
define material properties and operating conditions
Interpretation of CFD results
Examine the solution of CFD simulations using graphical and numerical tools;
suggest and make revision of the models.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
867
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO4 Discuss faults in the application of simulation techniques to evaluate the
modelling method and data accuracy
Simulation results:
Extracting relevant information from simulation-based exercises
Interpretation and presentation of results of CFD simulations
Validation and verification of computational modelling
Discuss in groups industry case studies involving simulation techniques in the
context of data accuracy and faults.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
868
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Explore the capabilities and limitations of computer-
based models in meeting design fundamentals and their use in
solving problems in engineering
P1 Explore the capabilities M1 Analyse the capabilities D1 Evaluate the
and limitations of any two and limitations of a range of application of computer-
computer-based models computer-based models. based models to an
used within an industrial industrial environment
M2 Analyse the processes and
environment to solve that would improve
applications used in solving
problems in engineering. efficiency and problem-
problems in engineering.
solving, with
recommendations.
LO2 Develop finite element model(s) in order to find and solve
potential structural or performance issues
P2 Analyse the role of finite M3 Critically analyse the finite D2 Justify
element analysis in modelling element model that help to recommendations for
products and systems. find and solve potential recognising and solving
structural or performance- potential structural or
P3 Develop a finite element
based issues. performance-based issues
model to analyse a given
for a range of practical
practical example to solving
examples, supported by
potential structural or
the outcomes of finite
performance-based issues.
element product and
systems models for
a range of practical
examples.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
869
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Pass Merit Distinction
LO3 Perform CFD simulations to evaluate pressure and
velocity distributions within an engineering setting
P4 Demonstrate the M4 Evaluate the application D3 Provide supported
importance of CFD and limitations of CFD in an and appropriate
simulations to evaluate engineering context. recommendations for
pressure and velocity improving efficiency and
distributions in the the generation of suitable
engineering setting. meshes for CFD
simulations.
P5 Perform CFD simulation
to evaluate pressure and
velocity distributions within
an engineering setting.
LO4 Discuss faults in the application of simulation techniques
to evaluate the modelling method and data accuracy
P6 Discuss potential faults in
M5 Trace potential faults in D4 Critically evaluate the
the application of simulation
the application of simulation application of simulation
techniques.
techniques. techniques as part of the
decision-making process
P7 Discuss the use of
M6 Assess the results of
in an engineering
modelling methods and
modelling with respect to
situation.
data accuracy in computer outcomes and data accuracy
simulations. and make recommendations
for improvements.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
870
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Chandrupatla T. and Belegundu A. (2021) Introduction to finite elements in engineering.
Cambridge University Press.
Ciarlet P. and Luneville E. (2023) The Finite Element Method: From Theory to Practice.
Wiley-ISTE.
Kurowski P.M. (2022) Finite element analysis for design engineers. SAE International.
Muftu S. (2022) Finite Element Method: Physics and Solution Methods. 1st Ed.
Academic Press.
Okada H. and atluri S.N. (2020) Computational and Experimental Simulations in
Engineering: Proceedings of ICCES2019. Springer Link.
Rao S.S. (2017) The Finite Element Method in Engineering. 6th Ed.
Butterworth-Heinemann.
Tu J., Yeoh G.H., Liu C. and Tao Y. (2023) Computational fluid dynamics: a practical
approach. Elsevier.
Volkov K. (2020) Computational Models in Engineering. IntechOpen.
Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
Computational Engineering and Physical Modeling
Finite Elements in Analysis and Design
International Journal for Computational Methods in Engineering Science and
Mechanics
Progress in Computational Fluid Dynamics
Novel Computational Modelling (Applied Engineering Journal)
Virtual Engineering Journals
Virtual Engineering New Finding Journal
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4001: Engineering Design
Unit 5017: Advanced Manufacturing Technology.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
871
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025