Unit 5005: Further Thermodynamics
Unit Code: M/651/0859
Level: 5
Credits: 15
Introduction
From the refrigerators that we use in our homes to the colossal power stations that
generate the electricity we use and provide power to industry, the significance that
thermodynamics plays in the 21st century cannot be underestimated.
This unit aims to build on the techniques explored in Unit 4013: Fundamentals of
Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer , to develop further students’ skills in applied
thermodynamics by investigating the relationships between theory and practice.
Among the topics included in this unit are: heat pumps and refrigeration,
performance of air compressors, steam power plants, and gas turbines.
On successful completion of this unit, students will be able to learn about the
performance and operation of heat pumps and refrigeration systems, the applications
and efficiency of industrial compressors, the use of charts and/or tables to determine
steam plant parameters and characteristics, and the operation of gas turbines and
assess their efficiency.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
872
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Evaluate the performance and operation of heat pumps and refrigeration
systems
LO2 Review the applications and efficiency of industrial compressors
LO3 Determine steam plant parameters and characteristics using charts and/or
tables
LO4 Examine the operation of gas turbines and assess their efficiency.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
873
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Evaluate the performance and operation of heat pumps and refrigeration
systems
Heat pumps and refrigeration:
Reversed heat engines: reversed Carnot and Rankine cycles
Second law of thermodynamics
Refrigeration tables and charts (p-h diagrams)
Coefficient of performance of heat pumps and refrigerators
Vapor compression refrigeration cycle
Refrigerant fluids: properties and environmental effects
Economics of heat pumps.
LO2 Review the applications and efficiency of industrial compressors
Performance of air compressors:
Theoretical and realistic cycles
Isothermal and adiabatic work
Volumetric efficiency
Intercoolers, dryers, and air receivers
Hazards and faults: safety consideration and associated legislation.
LO3 Determine steam plant parameters and characteristics using charts and/or
tables
Steam power plant:
Use of tables and charts to analyse steam cycles
Circuit diagrams showing boiler, super heater, turbine, condenser,
and feed pump
Theoretical and actual operation: Carnot and Rankine cycle
Efficiencies and improvements: sustainability and environmental efficiency
considerations in decision-making.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
874
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO4 Examine the operation of gas turbines and assess their efficiency
Gas turbines:
Single and double-shaft gas turbine operation
Property diagrams: Brayton (Joule) cycle
Intercooling, reheating, and regeneration
Combined heat and power plants
Self-starting and burner ignition continuation
Fuels and Combustion,
Theoretical and actual combustion
Enthalpy-of-formation, enthalpy of combustion, and heating value
Safety first culture and application within the context: use of health and
safety policies, procedures and regulations, compliance, risk assessment
and mitigation.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
875
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Evaluate the performance and operation of heat pumps
and refrigeration systems
P1 Using didactic sketches, M1 Assess the limiting factors D1 Conduct a cost–benefit
evaluate the operating that impact the economics of analysis of the installation
principles of both heat pumps heat pumps. of a ground source heat
and refrigeration systems. pump on a smallholding
M2 Illustrate the contradiction
to make valid
P2 Use refrigeration tables between refrigeration cycles
recommendations
and pressure/enthalpy charts and the second law of
for improvements.
to determine COP, heating thermodynamics.
effect, and refrigeration effect
of reversed heat engines.
LO2 Review the applications and efficiency of industrial
compressors
P3 Review the different types M3 Evaluate isothermal D2 Critically evaluate the
of industrial compressors efficiency by calculating the volumetric efficiency
and identify justifiable isothermal and polytropic formula for a
applications for each. work of a reciprocating reciprocating compressor.
compressor.
P4 Discuss compressor faults
and potential hazards.
P5 Determine the volumetric
efficiency of a reciprocating
compressor.
LO3 Determine steam plant parameters and characteristics
using charts and/or tables
P6 Determine the need for M4 Justify why the Rankine D3 Critically evaluate the
superheated steam in a cycle is preferred over the pragmatic modifications
power-generating plant. Carnot cycle in steam made to the basic Rankine
production plants around cycle to improve the
P7 Apply the use of charts
the world. overall efficiency of steam
and/or tables to establish
generation power plants.
overall steam plant
efficiencies in power systems.
LO4 Examine the operation of gas turbines and assess their
efficiency
P8 Investigate the principles M5 Compare the actual plant D4 Evaluate the enthalpy
of operation of a gas turbine and theoretical efficiencies in of combustion, using
plant. a single-shaft gas turbine enthalpy of formation
system, accounting for any for the gas turbines.
P9 Examine the efficiency
discrepancies found.
of a gas turbine system.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
876
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Assael M.J., Maitland G.C., Maskow T., Stockar U.V., Wakeham W.A. and Will S. (2022)
Commonly Asked Questions in Thermodynamics. 2nd Ed. CRC Press.
Bejan A. (2016) Advanced Engineering Thermodynamics. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Borgnakke C. and Sonntag R. (2022) Fundamental of Thermodynamics. 10th Ed. Wiley.
Baskharone E. A. (2012) Thermal Science: Essentials of Thermodynamics, Fluid Mechanics,
and Heat Transfer. McGraw Hill.
Cengel Y.A., Boles M.A. and Kanoglu M. (2019) Thermodynamics: An Engineering
Approach Si . 9th Ed. McGraw Hill.
Dixon, S. L. and Hall C. (2013) Fluid mechanics and thermodynamics of turbomachinery.
Butterworth-Heinemann.
Granet I., Alvarado J. and Bluestein M. (2021) Thermodynamics and Heat Power. 9th Ed.
CRC Press.
Kleinstreuer C. (2021) Essentials of Engineering Thermodynamics. 1st Ed. McGraw-Hill.
Lloyd W. (Editor) (2023) Handbook of Heat Transfer and Fluid Flow (Hardback).
Willford Press.
Murphy K. (Editor) (2023) Engineering Thermodynamics: Simulation with Entropy
(Hardback). Clanrye International.
Potter M.C. and Somerton C.W. (2019) Schaums Outline of Thermodynamics for
Engineers. 4th Ed. McGraw-Hill.
Rayner J. (2008) Basic Engineering Thermodynamics . 5th Ed. Pearson.
Trachenko K. (Author) (2023) Theory of Liquids: From Excitations to Thermodynamics
(Hardback). Cambridge University Press.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
877
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
Applied Thermal Engineering
International Communications in Heat and Mass Transfer
International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer
International Journal of Turbomachinery, Propulsion and Power
International Journal of Thermal Sciences
Thermodynamics: A Section of Entropy
Journal of Turbomachinery
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4013: Fundamentals of Thermodynamics and Heat Engines
Unit 5023: Thermofluids.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
878
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025