Unit 5006: Further Engineering
Mathematics
Unit Code: Y/651/0860
Level: 5
Credits: 15
Introduction
The understanding of more advanced mathematics is important within an engineering
and manufacturing sector curriculum to support and broaden abilities within the
applied subjects at the core of all engineering programmes. Students are introduced
to additional topics that will be relevant to them as they progress to the next level of
their studies, advancing their knowledge of the underpinning mathematics gained in
Unit 4002: Engineering Mathematics .
The unit will prepare students to analyse and model engineering/manufacturing
situations using mathematical techniques. Among the topics included in this unit
are: number theory, complex numbers, matrix theory, linear equations, numerical
integration, numerical differentiation, and graphical representations of curves
for estimation within an engineering/manufacturing context. Finally, students will
expand their knowledge of calculus to discover how to model and solve engineering/
manufacturing problems using first and second-order differential equations.
On successful completion of this unit, students will be able to use applications of
number theory in practical engineering situations, solve systems of linear equations
relevant to engineering/manufacturing applications using matrix methods,
approximate solutions of contextualised examples with graphical and numerical
methods, and review models of engineering and manufacturing systems using
ordinary differential equations.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
879
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Use applications of number theory in practical engineering/manufacturing
situations
LO2 Solve systems of linear equations relevant to engineering//manufacturing
sector applications using matrix methods
LO3 Approximate solutions of contextualised examples with graphical and
numerical methods
LO4 Review models of engineering/manufacturing systems using ordinary
differential equations.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
880
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Use applications of number theory in practical engineering/manufacturing
situations
Number theory:
Bases of a number (Denary, Binary, Octal, Duodecimal, Hexadecimal)
and converting between bases
Types of numbers (Natural, Integer, Rational, Real, Complex)
The modulus, argument, and conjugate of complex numbers
Polar and exponential forms of complex numbers
The use of de Moivre’s Theorem in engineering/manufacturing
Complex number applications e.g., electric circuit analysis, information,
and energy control systems
Application of advanced numerical skills (Binary, dotted decimal notation)
required to meet the defined specifications
Problem-solving and ensuring quality solutions to practical
engineering/manufacturing situations relevant to the occupation/sector
(e.g., operations, manufacturing, space, aeronautical, automation, electrical,
electronics, mechanical, etc.); attention to detail and responsive to feedback;
communication and presentation of solutions (including written, verbal,
electronic format) to stakeholders, discussions, and negotiations.
LO2 Solve systems of linear equations relevant to engineering/manufacturing
applications using matrix methods
Matrix methods:
Introduction to matrices and matrix notation
The process for addition, subtraction, and multiplication of matrices
Introducing the determinant of a matrix and calculating the determinant
for a 2x2 and 3x3 matrix
Using the inverse of a square matrix to solve linear equations
Cramers Rule
Gaussian elimination to solve systems of linear equations (up to 3x3)
Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
881
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO3 Approximate solutions of contextualised examples with graphical and
numerical methods
Graphical and numerical methods:
Standard curves of common functions, including quadratic, cubic, logarithm,
and exponential curves
Systematic curve sketching knowing the equation of the curve
Using sketches to approximate solutions of equations
Numerical analysis using the bisection method and the Newton–Raphson
method
Numerical integration using the mid-ordinate rule, the trapezium rule,
and Simpson’s rule
Examples of engineering scenarios using numerical methods for first-order and
second-order differential equations; partial differential equations; homogeneous
and non-homogeneous equations.
LO4 Review models of engineering/manufacturing systems using ordinary
differential equations
Differential equations:
Formation and solutions of first-order differential equations (e.g., separation of
variables)
Applications of first-order differential equations e.g., RC and RL electric circuits,
Newton’s laws of cooling, charge and discharge of electrical capacitors, and
complex stresses and strains
Formation and solutions of second-order differential equations
Applications of second-order differential equations e.g., mass-spring-damper
systems, information and energy control systems, heat transfer, automatic
control systems and beam theory and RLC circuits
Introduction to Laplace transforms for solving linear ordinary differential
equations
Applications involving Laplace transforms and inverse Laplace transforms.
For example, electric circuit theory, load frequency control, harmonic vibrations
of beams, reactor dynamics, and engine governors.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
882
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Continuous Professional Development (CPD) within the context:
Improve competencies in developing/using mathematical models of advanced
engineering and manufacturing systems relevant to chosen occupation/sector
through upskilling/reskilling opportunities (e.g., energy sustainability
systems/models, climate change mathematical models for renewable
technologies, advanced mathematics for Industry 4.0 technologies,
applied mathematics for digitalisation, etc.).
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
883
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Use applications of number theory in practical
engineering/manufacturing situations
P1 Use addition and M1 Solve problems using D1 Test the correctness of
multiplication methods for de Moivre’s Theorem. a trigonometric identity
numbers that are expressed using de Moivre’s
in different base systems. Theorem.
P2 Solve
engineering/manufacturing
problems using complex
number theory.
P3 Perform arithmetic
operations using the polar
and exponential forms of
complex numbers.
LO2 Solve systems of linear equations relevant to engineering/
manufacturing applications using matrix methods
P4 Calculate the determinant M2 Determine the solution to D2 Validate solutions for
of a set of given linear a set of given engineering the given engineering
equations using a 3x3 matrix. linear equations using the linear equations using
Inverse Matrix Method for a appropriate computer
P5 Solve a system of three
3x3 matrix. software.
linear equations using
Gaussian elimination.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
884
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Pass Merit Distinction
LO3 Approximate solutions of contextualised examples with
graphical and numerical methods
P6 Approximate solutions of M3 Solve engineering D3 Critically evaluate
sketched functions using a problems and formulate the use of numerical
graphical estimation method. mathematical models using estimation methods,
graphical and numerical commenting on their
P7 Calculate the roots of an
integration. applicability and the
equation using two different
accuracy of the methods.
iterative techniques
P8 Determine the numerical
integral of engineering
functions using two different
methods.
LO4 Review models of engineering/manufacturing systems
using ordinary differential equations
P9 Review and solve first-
M4 Demonstrate how D4 Critically evaluate first-
order differential equations
different models of order and second-order
related to engineering/
engineering systems using differential equations
manufacturing systems. first-order differential when generating the
equations can be used to solutions to engineering/
P10 Formulate and solve
solve engineering/ manufacturing situations,
second-order homogeneous
manufacturing problems. using models of
and non-homogeneous
engineering systems.
differential equations related
to engineering/manufacturing
systems.
P11 Calculate solutions to
linear ordinary differential
equations using Laplace
transforms.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
885
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Arfken G. B., Weber H. J., and harris F. E. (2011) Mathematical methods for physicists:
a comprehensive guide . Academic press.
Bird J. (2021) Higher Engineering Mathematics . 9th Ed. Routledge.
Bird J. (2019) Science and Mathematics for Engineering . 6th Ed. Routledge.
Botelho F.S. (2021) Functional Analysis, Calculus of Variations and Numerical Methods
for Models in Physics and Engineering . 1st Edition. CRC Press.
Chapra S. (2022) Applied Numerical Methods with MATLAB for Engineers and Scientists.
5th Edition. McGraw-Hill.
Chapra S. and Clough D. (2021) Applied Numerical Methods with Python for Engineers
and Scientists. 1st Edition. McGraw-Hill.
Chapra S. and Canale R. (2020) Numerical Methods for Engineers. 8th Edition.
McGraw-Hill.
Croft A., Davison R., Hargreaves M., and Flint J. (2017) Engineering Mathematics.
5th edition. Pearson Education.
Duffy D.G (2022) Advanced Engineering Mathematics: A Second Course with MatLab.
1st Edition. CRC Press.
Glyn J. and Dyke P. (2020) Modern Engineering Mathematics. 6th edition. Pearson.
Islam N., Singh S.B., Ranjan P., and Haghi A.K. (2021) Mathematics Applied to
Engineering in Action: Advanced Theories, Methods, and Models. 1st Edition. CRC Press.
Made Easy Editorial Board (2022) Engineering Mathematics for GATE 2023 and ESE 2023
(Prelims) – Theory and Previous Year Solved Papers. India: Made EASY Publications
Pvt Ltd.
Ram M. (2021) Recent Advances in Mathematics for Engineering. CRC Press.
Teodorescu P., Stanescu N., and Pandrea N. (2013) Numerical Analysis with Applications
in Mechanics and Engineering. Wiley-IEEE Press.
Ram M. (2020) Mathematics in Engineering Sciences: Novel Theories, Technologies,
and Applications. 1st Edition. CRC Press.
Vick B. (2020) Applied Engineering Mathematics. CRC Press.
Singh K. (2011) Engineering Mathematics Trough Applications . Basingstoke,
Palgrave Macmillan.
Stroud K.A. and Booth D.J. (2013) Engineering Mathematics . 7th Ed: Basingstoke,
Palgrave Macmillan.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
886
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
Annals of Mathematics
Computational Geometry
The Quarterly Journal of Mathematics
Journal of Geometry and Physics
Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics
International Journal of Engineering Mathematics
Journal of Engineering Mathematics
Journal of Mathematical Physics
Journal of Computational and Engineering Mathematics
Links
This unit links to the following related unit:
Unit 4002: Engineering Mathematics
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
887
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025