Unit 5007: Commercial Programming
Software
Unit Code: A/651/0861
Level: 5
Credits: 15
Introduction
The use of Computer Aided Design (CAD) and simulation in the electronic and
electrical engineering industry is ever growing. Commercial software packages enable
an engineer to design, simulate, model and predict the outcome of a design before a
product has been made. This enables time and cost savings in the development of a
product whilst enabling the engineer to further develop their design.
The aim of this unit is to introduce students to the availability and use of commercial
software packages within electronics engineering, including design, simulation, simple
microprocessor programming and evaluation of the tools available.
On successful completion of this unit students will be able to research a range of
software tools or applications to support engineering functions related to electronics,
consider how a software package can be used to simulate the behaviour of an
electronic circuits function, explain how to programme a microprocessor-based
device to achieve a specified outcome/task, evaluate a specific electronics software
tool/application, describe the types of commercial software available, compare the
differences between a software simulation and a real-world circuit, and write simple
commands to a microcontroller.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
888
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit a student will be able to:
LO1 Research a range of software application tools to determine how they can
support electronic engineering functions effectively
LO2 Explain how a software package can be used to simulate the behaviour of an
electronic circuit function and compare the results to real components and
circuits
LO3 Programme a microprocessor-based device to achieve a specified outcome
or task using commercially available software
LO4 Evaluate an electronics software application tool to report on its ability to
replicate the real world and the resource savings this can bring to an
organisation.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
889
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Research a range of software application tools to determine how they can
support electronic engineering functions effectively
Exposition of computer packages or applications:
Circuit design, simulation, testing and analysis
Printed circuit board layouts
Electronic design automation (EDA or ECAD)
Microcontroller programming, such as Programmable Intelligent Computers
(PICs). Microcontroller function simulation, monitoring and testing.
LO2 Explain how a software package can be used to simulate the behaviour of
an electronic circuit function and compare the results to real components
or circuits
Application of an industrial computer-aided design package:
Simulation and analysis of electronic circuits.
PCB design:
Creation of schematic netlists of a given design and transfer to a PCB layout to
make design created using computer-based tools.
Build:
Component identification and handling
Develop soldering skills to be able to populate a printed circuit board.
Test and comparison:
Application of test equipment to measure voltage, current and resistance
Systematic test, commission and fault finding methods
Compare simulated values with tested values, comparison criteria to include;
function, behaviour, accuracy, response times and errors.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
890
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO3 Programme a microprocessor-based device to achieve a specified outcome
or task using commercially available software
Introduction to microprocessors:
Introduction to: common languages, compilers and simulators in-circuit
debugging
Simple programming for exercises:
Digital inputs, simple user feedback
Simulation and debugging
Motor, relay and sound outputs
Communication.
LO4 Review an electronics software application tool to report on its ability to
replicate the real world and the resource savings this can bring to an
organisation.
Software application:
Software applications with specific industry examples incorporating ease of use,
functions available, performance, reliability, quality and costs
Possible limiting factors in software systems, based on previous work
undertaken in the unit
Current trends in simulation, testing and microprocessor development.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
891
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Research a range of software application tools to
determine how they can support electronic engineering
functions effectively
P1 Examine the functions of M1 Analyse the effectiveness D1 Evaluate the functions
commercial programming of a range of commercial and benefits of a range of
software. software in supporting commercial software used
electronic engineering in developing electrical
P2 Discuss the categories of
functions. engineering.
commercial electrical and
electronic software.
LO2 Explain how a software package can be used to
simulate the behaviour of an electronic circuit function and
compare the results to real components or circuits
P3 Design a simple PCB M2 Design a complex PCB D2 Critically evaluate the
layout using a software layout with a good level of functionality of simulation
package. optimisation using a in comparison with real
software package. components, using a
P4 Investigate and compare
complex PCB layout.
results produced in M3 Evaluate functionality
simulation to develop an of simulation to show
analysis with the physical considered comparisons
build. between testing and
simulation.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
892
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Pass Merit Distinction
LO3 Programme a microprocessor-based device to achieve
a specified outcome or task using commercially available
software
P5 Programme a M4 Make improvements to D3 Critically evaluate the
microprocessor-based given examples to produce functionality of simulation by
device to produce working complex working code. noting variations between
code using appropriate testing and simulation.
M5 Evaluate code through
software.
simulation and in the
P6 Test and review code hardware, demonstrating
used through simulation good competence of the
and in the hardware. software.
LO4 Review an electronics software application tool to
report on its ability to replicate the real world and the
resource savings this can bring to an organisation.
P7 Evaluate an electronics
M6 Analyse an electronics D4 Critically analyse current
software application and its
software application and its and emerging applications of
ability to replicate the real
ability to replicate the real commercial software, with
world, supported by industry world, supported by specific clear application to industry
specific examples and industry examples and examples, identifying trends
illustrating the resource illustrating the resource and recognising technical
savings implications offered savings implications this has. and economic factors that
by this approach. influence developments.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
893
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Blum J. (2013) Exploring Arduino . Wiley.
Cilingiroglu U. (2019) Analog Integrated Circuit Design by Simulation: Techniques,
Tools, and Methods. McGraw Hill.
Petruzzellis T. (2005) Build your own electronics workshop . McGraw-Hill.
Richardson M. and Wallace S. (2013) Getting started with Raspberry Pi . 1st Ed.
Maker Media Inc.
Robbins A. and Miller W.C. (2013) Circuit analysis: theory and practice .
5th Ed. International Ed. Clifton Park, N.Y.: Delmar.
Websites
https://www.circuitlab.com/ Circuit Lab
Online schematic editor and circuit
simulator
(Training)
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4023: Computer Aided Design and Manufacture (CAD/CAM)
Unit 5004: Virtual Engineering
Unit 5008: Distributed Control Systems.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
894
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025