Unit 5008: Distributed Control Systems
Unit Code: D/651/0862
Level: 5
Credits: 15
Introduction
With increased complexity and greater emphasis on cost control and environmental
issues, the efficient control of manufacture and processing plant becomes ever more
important. While small and medium scale industries require Programmable Logic
Controller (PLC) and Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) technologies,
large scale applications require Distributed Control Systems (DCS).
This unit introduces students to the applications of Distributed Control Systems in
industrial measurements and control engineering, the different types of industrial
networking used in control and instrumentation, the analysis of the performance of
a given control system, and how to suggest appropriate solutions using a variety of
possible methods.
On successful completion of this unit students will be able to explain the impact
of automated systems in modern control processes, explain the basic concepts,
architecture, operation and communication of distributed control systems,
identify appropriate techniques to specify and implement a simple DCS and
develop programmes to use machine interfaces to monitor and control the
behaviour of a complex system.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
895
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Explore the impact of automated systems in modern control processes
LO2 Evaluate the basic concepts, architecture, operation and communication of
Distributed Control Systems
LO3 Suggest appropriate techniques to specify and implement a simple Distributed
Control System
LO4 Develop programmes to use machine interfaces to monitor and control the
behaviour of a complex system.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
896
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Explore the impact of automated systems in modern control processes
Modern control processes:
Introduction to computer-based control systems and typical distributed control
systems
An overview of DCS and SCADA systems
Fundamentals of PLC
Comparison of DCS, SCADA and PLCs
Selection and justification of control strategies.
LO2 Evaluate the basic concepts, architecture, operation and communication of
Distributed Control Systems
Distributed Control Systems:
Evolution and description of commercial DCS, DCS elements
Basic DCS controller configuration
Introduction to basic communication principles and protocol for DCS,
PLC and SCADA
Hierarchical systems and distributed systems
Introduction to simulation models and packages.
LO3 Suggest appropriate techniques to specify and implement a simple
Distributed Control System
Techniques:
Introduction to programmable controllers, programming of PLC and DCS
systems
Operator interface
Alarm system management for DCS systems
Distributed Control System reporting
Configuration of hardware and software of PLC and DCS
Programmable controller interfacing and troubleshooting
Configuration of a typical DCS control using typical plant problems.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
897
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO4 Develop programmes to use machine interfaces to monitor and control the
behaviour of a complex system.
Behaviours:
Computation of control systems
Control and supervision of Distributed Control Systems
Human Machine Interfaces (HMIs) and alarms
Network communication standards
Application of field interfaces and networks
Application of diagnostic and maintenance consideration
Project implementation phases and life cycle
Overview of future trends (e.g. digital control, intelligent systems and virtual
instruments).
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
898
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Explore the impact of automated systems in modern
control processes
P1 Discuss the application of M1 Evaluate the use of D1 Critically evaluate and
DCS, SCADA and PLC, and DCS from field devices to justify the selection of
their respective fields of commercial data processing. control strategies and
application. their function against the
M2 Illustrate the control
specifications of a DCS.
P2 Investigate the modes, structures, and
component parts and their diagnostic methods used
respective functions, in a in controllers.
modern control process.
P3 Review the main
building blocks (layout),
communication paths and
signal level(s) of a DCS.
LO2 Evaluate the basic concepts, architecture, operation
and communication of Distributed Control Systems
P4 Evaluate the concept, M3 Critique the input output D2 Critically evaluate the
architecture, operation and interface, fieldbus protocols performance of the operator
communication of DCS, and physical layers of a interface in a DCS and its
SCADA and PLC in their distributed control system. associated hardware.
respective applications.
M4 Critically examine the
P5 Review the hierarchical application of local area
systems in DCS. network communication and
network types to distributed
P6 Assess the use of Local
control systems.
Area Network, field bus
types, and protocols.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
899
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Pass Merit Distinction
LO3 Suggest appropriate techniques to specify and
implement a simple Distributed Control System
P7 Review the application M5 Develop a high level D3 Analyse the interfacing,
and implementation of the programme for a typical structure and performance
DCS systems. plant problem. of a good alarm system.
P8 Determine appropriate M6 Explore the hardware
techniques for the and software configuration
application of DCS in of a typical plant problem,
different environments. making use of various
operator display
P9 Design and implement a
configurations.
simple DCS to satisfy
predefined parameters.
LO4 Develop programmes to use machine interfaces to
monitor and control the behaviour of a complex system.
P10 Explain the importance
M7 Show how the D4 Analyse and justify the
of the control principles and
configuration control choice of hardware, software
supervision of a DCS.
procedures ensure data and communication systems
integrity. and strategy in terms of
P11 Apply HMI to different
architecture, system
process control applications
M8 Explore the
requirements, system
and understand the alarm requirements for
integration and toolkits
reporting. in-built diagnostics and
available.
maintenance diagnostic
P12 Demonstrate the role
routines.
of the operator interface,
associated hardware,
diagnostics and
maintenance for a DCS.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
900
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Bailey, D. and Wright, E. (2003) Practical SCADA for Industry . Newnes.
Bolton W. (2021) Instrumentation and Control Systems. 3rd Ed. Elsevier.
Boyer, S. (2004) SCADA-Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition System .
3rd Ed. The Automation Systems and Automation Society (ISA) publication.
Ghosh A. (2015) Distributed Systems: An Algorithmic Approach . 2nd Ed. CRC Press.
Sharma, K. (2011) Overview of Industrial Process Automation . Elsevier.
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 5007: Commercial Programming Software
Unit 5021: Further Control Systems Engineering.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
901
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025