Unit 5009: Further Programmable Logic
Controllers (PLCs)
Unit Code: F/651/0863
Level: 5
Credits: 15
Introduction
Programmable Logic Controllers (PLCs) were invented by the American Richard (‘Dick’)
Morley in 1969, to be used in the manufacture of cars. Prior to that date production
lines had been controlled by a mass of hard-wired relays. Using programmable
devices in their place meant that changes in production could be implemented
much faster without the need to rewire control circuits.
The aim of this unit is to further develop students’ skills in the use of PLCs and their
specific applications within engineering and manufacturing. Among the topics
included in this unit are: device interface methods, PLC signal processing and
communications with other devices, PLC programming methodology and alternative
programmable control devices.
On successful completion of this unit students will be able to research the design,
selection and use of PLCs as part of a larger system, programme a PLC to solve an
industrial process problem for a given application and illustrate the alternative
strategies for using other available types of programmable control devices.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
902
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Discuss the selection of a specific PLC for a given industrial application
LO2 Evaluate how PLCs exchange information and process signals with other
devices
LO3 Design a PLC programme to solve an industrial process problem for a given
application
LO4 Analyse alternative strategies using other types of programmable control
devices in industrial applications.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
903
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Discuss the selection of a specific PLC for a given industrial application
PLC selection:
Common PLC industrial applications
Different PLC types, their features and PLC manufacturers
External input and output devices: analogue and digital
PLC operational characteristics: speed, current, voltages, memory
Alternative PLC modules available: Relay, Triac, Transistor, Analogue to Digital.
LO2 Evaluate how PLCs exchange information and process signals with other
devices
PLC signal processing and communications with other devices:
Communication links and standards
Networked bus systems
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) systems and Human Machine
Interfaces (HMIs).
LO3 Design a PLC programme to solve an industrial process problem for a given
application
PLC programming methodology:
Fundamentals of logic–ladder diagrams and other programming structures
PLC programming methods used of PLCs in accordance with IEC 61131
Logic functions: AND, OR, NOT, EXOR
Number systems used by PLCs: Binary, Hexadecimal, Octal, BCD
System input and output allocation data
Advanced functions: registers, Analogue to Digital (AtoD), performing
calculations, high-speed counters and timers
Program test and debug software functions
Fault-finding of systems using PLC software remotely
Software toolbox elements
Virtual PLC simulations.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
904
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO4 Analyse alternative strategies for using other types of programmable
control devices in industrial applications.
Alternative programmable control devices:
Programmable Logic Device (PLD)
Peripheral Interface Controller (PIC)
Microcontrollers
Industrial computers.
Programmable device interface methods:
Relays and solid state relays
Opto couplers
Opto isolators
Motor driver interface integrated circuits.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
905
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Discuss the selection of a specific PLC for a given
industrial application
P1 Investigate the key M1 Justify the choice of a D1 Evaluate and justify the
industrial application specific PLC suitable for a selection of a specific PLC for
characteristics of a given given industrial application. an industrial application.
industrial application.
P2 Compare the operational
features and characteristics
of PLCs from several
manufacturers.
LO2 Evaluate how PLCs exchange information and process
signals with other devices
P3 Illustrate the main M2 Show how PLCs in D2 Provide a justified and
differences between industry integrate with valid rationale for the
communication links and HMIs and SCADA. convergence of PLCs/HMIs
standards used within PLC and SCADA control systems.
M3 Evaluate the use of
systems.
SCADA and HMIs in industry.
P4 Review the advantages of
using networked bus PLC
systems.
LO3 Design a PLC programme to solve an industrial process
problem for a given application
P5 Design a PLC programme M4 Demonstrate the use of D3 Critically evaluate a PLC
to solve an industrial test and debug software to programme used to solve an
application problem. correct PLC program faults. industrial application
problem.
P6 Demonstrate the use M5 Explore the practical
of PLC programming and uses of PLC advanced
simulation software in a functions.
given application.
LO4 Analyse alternative strategies for using other types of
programmable control devices in industrial applications.
P7 Review the different types M6 Review the problems D4 Critically evaluate the
of programmable control faced by using alternative selection of an alternative
devices available. devices in an industrial programmable device in a
environment. given application.
P8 Examine an industrial
application to determine the
required characteristics of a
control device.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
906
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Bolton, W. (2015) Programmable Logic Controllers . 5th Ed. Newes.
Kamel, K. and Kamel, E. (2013) Programmable Logic Controllers: Industrial Control .
McGraw-Hill Education.
Morton, J. (2005) The PIC Microcontroller: Your Personal Introductory Course .
3rd Ed. Newnes.
Perez, E. (2012) Introduction to PLCs: A beginner’s guide to Programmable Logic
Controllers . Elvin Perez Adrover.
Petruzella F. (2023) Programmable Logic Controllers . 6th Ed. McGraw Hill.
Rehg A. R. and SARTOR J. G. (2014) Programmable Logic Controllers. 2nd Ed. Pearson.
Stewart G. R. (2021) Plc Programming for Beginners . SIEMENS.
Websites
http://www.seipub.org/ Science and Engineering Publishing
Company
International Journal of Information and
Computer Science
(Journal)
http://www.airccse.org/ AIRCC Publishing Corporation
International Journal of Computer
Science, Engineering and Information
Technology (IJCSEIT)
(Journal)
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4006: Mechatronics
Unit 4015: Automation, Robotics and Programmable Logic Controllers (PLCs)
Unit 5007: Commercial Programming Software.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
907
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025