Unit 5010: Further Electrical Machines
and Drives
Unit Code: H/651/0864
Level: 5
Credits: 15
Introduction
Electric machines are used to convert electrical power to mechanical power or vice-
versa. They are an indispensable part of engineering processes and are the workhorse
in both commercial and industrial applications.
The aim of this unit is to continue developing the skills in the use and application of
electrical machines, particularly direct current (DC) and alternating current (AC) drives.
Among the topics included in this unit are: an introduction to electrical machines and
drives, and their characteristics, starting and braking, loading conditions, ratings, and
their control.
On successful completion of this unit students will be able to learn about the
operation of different motors used in industry, different types of industrial drives
used in various disciplines, assessing the importance of electrical machines and their
drives for a given industrial application, and analysing their performances and suggest
appropriate solutions using a variety of possible methods.
Prior learning: It is recommended to complete Unit 4021 Electrical Machines before
studying this unit.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
908
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Synthesise knowledge and skills on the principles of operation and the
characteristics of electrical machines and their industrial applications
LO2 Examine the fundamentals of power electronics converters
LO3 Analyse the operation and characteristics of DC drives and their industrial
applications
LO4 Analyse the operation and characteristics of AC drives and their industrial
applications
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
909
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Synthesise knowledge and skills on the principles of operation and the
characteristics of electrical machines and their industrial applications
Principles of operation and characteristics of electrical machines and their industrial
applications:
Electrical machines, concepts of electrical machines and their classification
Principles of operation of DC machines and their characteristics
Principles of operation of three-phase induction machines and their
characteristics
Principles of operation of synchronous machines and their characteristics
Introduction to special machines
Four-quadrant torque-speed operation, inertia, and friction characteristic of
electrical machines.
Simulation using Matlab/Simulink or similar commercially available software
Methods and practices for operations and control: Administrative controls;
operational controls; geometry, location, access; hazards and control measures
in practice: commissioning, decommissioning, monitoring and repair of electrical
machines; storage and transport; sustainability factors in industrial applications;
associated documentation control processes (including access, authorisation,
location, format) and standard operating procedures (SoPs); relevant use of data
collection systems, data input/output formats within the context of industrial use
of electrical machines.
Electrical machines and Industry 4.0: Use and benefits from increased
connectivity, performance optimisation, integration and impact on organisations.
Example applications such as data driven condition monitoring and multidrive
systems.
LO2 Examine the fundamentals of power electronics converters
Fundamentals of power electronics converters used in power processing units for
electric drives:
Electronic switches (transistors); MOSFETs, IGBTs and how they are driven
including practical considerations
Concepts of electrical drives and their classification
DC to DC converters, AC to DC converters (Rectifiers), DC to AC converters
(Inverters), AC to AC converters (Cyclo-converters)
Simulation using Matlab/Simulink or similar commercially available software.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
910
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO3 Analyse the operation and characteristics of DC drives and their industrial
applications
Operation and characteristics of DC drives and their industrial applications:
DC drives and their application to emerging areas such as smart grids and
renewable energy sources
Operating modes of DC drives; single-phase drives, three-phase drives,
Pulse Width Modulation (PWM), two/four quadrant operation drives
Application; closed loop control of DC drives
Simulation using Matlab/Simulink or similar commercially available software
Practical experience in using equipment, where available
Safety first culture in industrial application design − health and safety policies,
procedures and regulations, compliance, individual/team responsibilities, risk
assessment and risk mitigation.
LO4 Analyse the operation and characteristics of AC drives and their industrial
applications
Operation and characteristics of AC drives and their industrial applications:
AC drives and their industrial applications such as process control, smart grids
and renewable energy sources
Induction motor drives: voltage, and frequency control (V/f with RL
compensation), and closed loop speed control
Synchronous motor drives: closed loop speed control (Field Oriented Control,
FOC) of synchronous motor drives
Simulation using Matlab/Simulink or similar commercially available software
Practical experience in using equipment, where available.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
911
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Synthesise knowledge and skills on the principles of
operation and the characteristics of electrical machines and
their industrial applications
P1 Evaluate different types of M1 Utilise Matlab and D1 Critically evaluate the
electrical machines and their Simulink or similar software performance of a given
industrial applications. for modelling and electrical machine for a
simulation of a given specific application using
P2 Illustrate the principle of
electrical machine. Matlab, Simulink or similar
operation of electrical machines
software.
with the aid of circuit diagrams M2 Analyse the
and waveforms. characteristics of a given
electrical machine from
P3 Synthesise knowledge
its equivalent circuits.
and skills on the construction,
operation and characteristics
of a given electrical machine.
LO2 Examine the fundamentals of power electronics
converters
P4 Illustrate, with the aid of a M3 Demonstrate how D2 Critically evaluate the
circuit diagram and waveforms, Matlab and Simulink performance of a MOSFET
the operation of a MOSFET (or similar software) are half-bridge DC/AC
half-bridge switch. used for modelling and converter using Matlab/
simulation of a MOSFET Simulink software, using
P5 Illustrate, with the aid of a
half-bridge switch. different MOSFETs.
circuit diagram and waveforms,
the operation of a full-wave M4 Evaluate the key
rectifier with smoothing. performance characteristics
of a MOSFET half-bridge
P6 Examine with the aid of
switch.
a circuit diagram, how an
H-bridge converts DC to AC.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
912
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Pass Merit Distinction
LO3 Analyse the operation and characteristics of DC drives
and their industrial applications
P7 Discuss the operating modes M5 Develop an open loop D3 Critically analyse the
of DC drives and control block diagram (using impact of a given DC drive
parameters. Matlab Simulink or similar on the operation and
software) of a DC motor performance of a specific
P8 Analyse the importance
and derive the relationship industrial process control
of DC drives in industrial
between the input and the system.
applications.
output of the system.
P9 Conceptualise with the aid of
M6 Investigate the
diagrams how an H-bridge can
parameters influencing the
be used to drive a DC machine
output characteristics of a
at different speeds and
DC machine, driven by an
directions.
H-Bridge when load is
P10 Illustrate, with the aid of
applied.
diagrams the implementation of
closed loop control of DC drives.
LO4 Analyse the operation and characteristics of AC drives and
their industrial applications
P11 Analyse the operating
M7 Develop an open loop D4 Critically analyse the
modes of AC drives, their
block diagram of an impact of a given AC drive
control parameters, and
induction motor (using on the operation and
their importance in industrial Matlab Simulink or similar performance of a specific
applications. software) and derive the industrial process control
relationship between the system.
P12 Illustrate, with the aid
input and the output of
of circuit diagrams and
the system.
waveforms, the principles
of operation of three-phase M8 Investigate how AC
AC drives. drive circuits are used
to control the speed of
P13 Propose, with the aid of
induction and synchronous
diagrams, how an H-Bridge can
motors.
be used to drive a single-phase
AC machine.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
913
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Alassouli, H.M. (2021) Lecture Notes for Electrical Machines Course . Self-published.
Bose B.K. (2001) Modern Power Electronics and AC Drives Hardcover . Printice Hall.
Boldea I. and Tutelea L.N. (2021) Electrical Machines: Steady State and Performance
with MATLAB . 2nd Ed. CRC Press.
Boldea I. and tutelea L.N. (2021) Electrical Machines: Two Volume Se t. 2nd Ed.
CRC Press.
El-Sharkawi M.A. (2018) Fundamentals of electric drives . 2nd Ed., CL Engineering.
Fucha E.F. and Masoum M.A.S. (2023) Power Quality in Power Systems, Electrical
Machines, and Power-Electronic Drives . 3rd Ed. Academic Press
Franchi C.M. (2022) Electrical Machine Drives – Fundamental Basics and Practice .
CRC Press.
Gieras J.F. (2020) Electrical Machines: Fundamentals of Electromechanical Energy
Conversion . CRC Press.
Hughes, A. (2013) Electric Motors and Drives: Fundamentals, Types and Applications.
4th Ed. Newnes.
Rashid M.H. (2012) Power Electronics: Circuits, Devices and Applications . 4th Ed.
Prentice Hall.
Rashid, M.H. (2001) Power Electronics Handbooks . 1st Ed. Academic Press.
Wildi T. (2014) Electrical Machines, Drives and Power Systems . 6th Ed.
Pearson New International Edition.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
914
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
CES Transactions on Electrical Machines and Systems
Electrical Machines and Control 1007-449X
Electrical Machines and Drives – A Section of Machines
Electrical Machines and Electromechanics
Electrical Machines & Power Systems
Fundamentals of Electrical Drives
International Journal of Electrical Machines and Drives
International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems
Journal of Electrical Engineering and Technology
Modern Electrical Drives: Trends, Problems, and Challenges
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4021: Electrical Machines.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
915
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025