Unit 5011: Industrial Power, Electronics
and Storage
Unit Code: J/651/0865
Level: 5
Credits: 15
Introduction
This unit presents a wide-ranging introduction to the field of existing and renewable
energy systems. There are many alternative sources of energy (some ‘green’) which
can be converted to an electrical form, providing energy for transport, heat/cooling,
and lighting, as well as energy for various industrial processes and applications.
Power electronic converters are an essential component of renewable and distributed
energy sources, including wind turbines, photovoltaics, marine energy systems and
energy storage systems. It is necessary to gain a clear understanding of, and be able
to examine, the technical implications of providing sustainable electrical energy to
meet the energy demand of the future.
The unit will also explore the potential impacts of climate change and why more, and
different forms of sustainable energy sources are required together with the need for
energy efficiency measures.
On successful completion of this unit, students will be able to learn about the
technological concepts behind providing a sustainable electrical energy supply for the
future, the fundamental technical and economic processes, and drivers at play in the
electrical power industry and how they affect the selection and use of energy sources.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
916
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Evaluate the energy demand to determine the technology and methods of
energy production
LO2 Explore current energy efficiency measures, technologies, and policies specific
to the building and transportation sectors
LO3 Analyse the control techniques of power electronics for renewable energy
systems
LO4 Investigate the impacts of renewable resources to the grid and the various
issues associated with integrating such resources to the grid.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
917
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Evaluate the energy demand to determine the technology and methods of
energy production
Energy demand:
Historical energy production, energy consumption, environmental aspects and
global warming
The need for energy systems and global energy demand over the short to long
term
Environmental effects associated with energy generation and consumption
Practicality, benefits, drawbacks, and effectiveness of renewable energy sources
Overview of non-renewable and renewable energy technologies (wind, solar, bio,
hydro, geothermal) and the associated costs
Future energy trends, scenarios, and sustainable energy sources.
LO2 Explore current energy efficiency measures, technologies, and policies
specific to the building and transportation sectors
Energy auditing, management, costs, requirements, bench marking and optimisation:
Energy management, planning, monitoring, policy, ecology, and environment.
Energy and buildings:
Overview of the significance of energy use and energy processes
Internal and external factors on energy use and the attributes of the factors
Sustainable buildings, Status of energy use in buildings and estimation of energy
use in a building
Standards for thermal performance of building envelope and evaluation of the
overall thermal transfer
Measures and technologies to improve energy efficiency in buildings,
SWOT analysis.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
918
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Energy and electric vehicles:
Electrical vehicle configurations, requirements, and circuit topology; full electric
and plug in hybrid vehicles
Policies, charging infrastructure, grid implications, measures, and technologies to
support more sustainable transportation, SWOT analysis
Use of MATLAB/Simulink or alternative appropriate software to model, simulate
and analyse the energy efficiency of a typical standard house or electric vehicle.
LO3 Analyse the control techniques of power electronics for renewable energy
systems
Control techniques:
Environmental aspects of electrical energy conversion using power electronics
Introduce design criteria of power converters for renewable energy applications
Analyse and comprehend the various operating modes of wind electrical
generators and solar energy systems
Introduce the industrial application of power converters, namely AC to DC,
DC to DC and AC to AC converters for renewable energy systems
Explain the recent advancements in power systems using the power electronic
systems. Introduction to basic analysis and operation techniques on power
electronic systems
Functional analysis of power converters’ main topologies
Use of MATLAB/Simulink to model, simulate and analyse the dynamic behaviour
of a simple renewable energy system.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
919
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO4 Investigate the impacts of renewable resources to the grid and the various
issues associated with integrating such resources to the grid
Impact of renewable resources:
Safe and secure operation of a simple power system
Standalone and grid connected renewable energy systems
Introduction to smart grid, features, functions, architectures, distributed
generation, grid integration and implications. Grid interactive systems, grid tied
systems, inverters, and application of its devices
Smart homes, power management, smart grid, intelligent/smart metering
Communication technologies and power electronics modules for smart grid
network, importance of power electronics in smart grid, for example energy
storage (electrical, chemical, biological, and heat), and the future of smart grid
Use of MATLAB/Simulink to model, simulate and analyse the dynamic behaviour
of a standard smart grid
Discuss in groups popular and latest models of integrating a diverse range of
renewable resources to the grid.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
920
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Evaluate the energy demand to determine the technology
and methods of energy production
P1 Evaluate the energy M1 Determine the D1 Justify the most
demand of a specific scenario effectiveness and drawbacks suitable technologies and
or case study by identifying of renewable energy systems methods of energy
the required technology for short- and long-term production for the local
and methods of energy impact on energy demands. area, backed by relevant
production with reasoning or data or research.
consideration of alternatives.
LO2 Explore current energy efficiency measures, technologies,
and policies specific to the building and transportation sectors
P2 Explore energy efficiency M2 Provide detailed SWOT D2 Conduct an impact
measures, technologies, and analysis of various energy analysis of current and
policies in the building and efficiency measures, emerging energy
transportation sectors technologies, and policies efficiency measures,
suggesting alternatives. in the building and technologies and policies
transportation sectors. in the building and
transportation sectors,
with insightful
recommendations or
predictions for future
developments.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
921
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Pass Merit Distinction
LO3 Analyse the control techniques of power electronics for
renewable energy systems
P3 Analyse the control M3 Provides an analysis of the D3 Conduct an in-depth
techniques of power control techniques of power impact analysis of the
electronics for a given electronics for renewable control techniques of
renewable energy system, energy systems, power electronics for
applying understanding of demonstrating a clear renewable energy
the key concepts and understanding of the systems, demonstrating a
practices. theoretical principles and superior understanding of
practical applications, principles, applications
including identification of and future trends.
strengths and weaknesses of
various techniques.
LO4 Investigate the impacts of renewable resources to the grid
and the various issues associated with integrating such
resources to the grid
P4 Investigate key impacts of
M4 Evaluate the impacts of D4 Synthesise the
renewable resources on the
renewable resources on the challenges and potential
grid and issues associated
grid and the issues with solutions, drawing on
with integrating such integration, demonstrating relevant case studies and
resources an understanding of the cutting-edge research.
complexities involved.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
922
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Ackermann T. (2012) Wind Power in Power Systems . Wiley.
Bhimbhra P.S. (2012) Power Electronics . Khanna Publishers.
Cole B. (Editor) (2023) Power Electronics: Devices, Circuits and Applications (Hardback).
Clanrye International.
Duffie J.A. and Beckman W. A. (2013) Solar Engineering of Thermal Processes . Wiley.
Dugan R.C., McGranaghan M.F., Santoso S., and Beaty H.W. (2012) Electrical Power
Systems Quality , Third Edition (Electronics) Hardcover – Illustrated. McGraw Hill.
Fekik A., Ghanes M. and Denoun H. (Editors) (2023) Power Electronics Converters and
their Control for Renewable Energy Applications (Paperback). Elsevier Science &
Technology.
Kassakian J.G., Perreault D.J., Verghese G.C. and Schlecht M.F. (2023) Principles of
Power Electronics (Hardback). Cambridge University Press.
Kumar S., Singh B., and Singh A.K. (Editors) (2023) Recent Advances in Power Electronics
and Drives: Select Proceedings of EPREC 2021 − Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering 852
(Paperback). Springer.
Kumar N., Guerrero J.M., Kastha D., and Saha T.K. (Editors) (2022) Power Electronics for
Next-Generation Drives and Energy Systems. Volume 1: Converters and control for drives .
IET Digital Library.
Masters G.M. (2013) Renewable and Efficient Electric Power Systems (IEEE Press)
Hardcover – Illustrated. Wiley-IEEE Press.
Na (2014) A Course in Electrical and Electronic Measurements and Instrumentation
(Nineteenth Revised Edition 2011 Reprint 2014) Paperback. NA.
Peake S. (Editor) (2017) Renewable Energy: Power for a Sustainable Future Paperback –
Illustrated. OUP Oxford.
Rashid M.H.(Editor) (2023) Power Electronics Handbook (Hardback). Elsevier.
Vittal V., Mccalley J.D., Anderson P.M., and Fouad A.A. (2019) Power System Control and
Stability (IEEE Press Series on Power and Energy Systems) Hardcover. Wiley-IEEE Press.
Willis H.L. (Editor) (2018) Distributed Power Generation: Planning and Evaluation . eBook.
Routledge.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
923
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
Energies
Energy and Buildings
Energy Policy
IEEE Power and Energy Magazine
IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics
International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems
International Journal of Sustainable Transportation
Journal of Cleaner Production
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews
Renewable Energy
Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 5018: Sustainability
Unit 5020: Utilisation of Electrical Power.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
924
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025