Unit 5012: Industrial Systems
Unit Code: K/651/0866
Level: 5
Credits: 15
Introduction
The speed and efficiency of many industrial processes is due, largely, to the control
systems selected for the application and the engineer’s ability to apply the most
appropriate technology for their operation.
This unit presents a structured approach to the development of advanced electronic
solutions in a range of modern industrial situations. An essential requirement here is
the engineer’s ability to utilise the most appropriate technology for each application,
to ensure the most efficient monitoring and control of variables such as pressure,
temperature, and speed.
Among the topics included in this unit are techniques and applications of electrical
and electronic engineering, as they apply to various branches of industry, such as
component handling, controlling actuators, responding to change of circumstances
in a process, or security issues of connected sensors and systems.
On successful completion of this unit students will be able to learn about system
elements and their overall characteristics, and analytically assess the accuracy and
repeatability of a range of instruments.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
925
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Appraise the main elements of an electronically controlled industrial system
LO2 Review and specify the interface requirements between electronic, electrical,
and mechanical transducers and controllers
LO3 Employ practical and computer-based methods to design and test a
measurement system
LO4 Apply appropriate analytical techniques to predict the performance of a
given system.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
926
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Appraise the main elements of an electronically controlled industrial
system
Fundamental concepts of industrial systems:
Discrete control
Input and output devices; open and closed loop systems
System elements, principles, and applications of important and representative
AC, DC and Stepper motors, and various types of linear actuators.
LO2 Review and specify the interface requirements between electronic,
electrical, and mechanical transducers and controllers
Interfacing and transducers:
Discrete automation using relays and solenoids, AC and DC motors, pneumatic,
hydraulic and electrical actuators, and other transducers and devices for
measuring and comparing physical parameters
Sensors, passive and active including, hall effect, thermocouples, proximity,
acoustics, RFID
Interfacing between electrical, electronic and mechanical transducers
Practical measurement using sensors and transducers, process actuators for
temperature and pressure control including Internet enabled technologies.
LO3 Employ practical and computer-based methods to design and test a
measurement system
System modelling and analysis:
The use of transfer functions to help predict the behaviour and constancy of an
industrial process, including accuracy, resolution and tolerances, repeatability
and stability, sensitivity and response time
Dealing with error and uncertainty in industrial systems
Use of computer packages in measurement and control, and dealing with
uncertainty and errors in systems (including Industry 4.0 systems).
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
927
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO4 Apply appropriate analytical techniques to predict the performance of a
given system
Use of analytical techniques for performance measurement. Examples of
analytical techniques could include: the Monte Carlo method to predict locations
and timings of machine failure for maintenance planning, or regression
modelling to analyse raw material influence on production outputs
Industry 4.0 and current trends in technology, including the future of industrial
systems, seamless integration of systems, the impact of digital developments,
the increase of wireless and remote control, Internet of Things, and big data.
Management and strategic issues relating to Industry 4.0, specifically, security
and hacking issues of connected sensors and systems.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
928
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Appraise the main elements of an electronically controlled
industrial system
P1 Appraise the key M1 Analyse the characteristics D1 Critically examine
components used in an of an electronically controlled the performance of an
electronically controlled industrial system by applying electronically controlled
industrial system. a variety of techniques to the system to make
solution of a given problem. recommendations for
P2 Review the main concepts
improvement.
underlying electronically
controlled industrial systems.
LO2 Review and specify the interface requirements between
electronic, electrical, and mechanical transducers and
controllers
P3 Review the interface M2 Predict the behaviour of D2 Critically investigate
requirements between an electronically controlled the behaviour of a given
electronic, electrical, and industrial system by applying control system to
mechanical transducers a variety of transducers to the compare different
and controllers. solution of a given problem electrical, electronic and
and choose a ‘best’ solution. mechanical approaches
P4 Justify the choice of
to control.
transducers and controllers
for a given task.
LO3 Employ practical and computer-based methods to design
and test a measurement system
P5 Employ any two practical M3 Interpret the D3 Develop an
and computer-based characteristics and behaviour evaluative report on the
methods to design and test of an existing electronic performance of an ideal
a measurement system. measurement system by measurement system
applying a variety of methods required to function
P6 Explain the use of practical
to find a solution to a given within Industry 4.0
and analytical methods in
problem. operations.
creating and testing a
measurement system.
LO4 Apply appropriate analytical techniques to predict the
performance of a given system
P7 Apply the main analytical M4 Evaluate the D4 Analyse an existing
techniques to explain the characteristics of an industrial system by using
performance of a given electronically controlled appropriate analytical
system. industrial system by applying techniques to
a variety of analytical provide justified
techniques to the solution recommendations to
of a given problem. improve performance.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
929
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Badiru A.B. and Omitaomu O.A. (2023) Systems 4.0: Systems Foundations for Industry
4.0. 1st Ed. CRC Press.
Balamurugan S. (Editors) (2022) Industrial Internet of Things: Technologies and Research
Directions. 1st Ed. CRC Press.
Bidanda B. (2022) Maynard’s Industrial and Systems Engineering Handbook. 6th Ed.
McGraw-Hill.
th
Bird J. (2022) Electrical Circuit Theory and Technology . 7 Ed. Routledge.
Bishop O. (2021) Electronics: A First Course. 3rd Ed. Routledge.
Hughes E. et al. (2016) Electrical and Electronic Technology . Pearson.
Massaro A. (2021) Electronics in Advanced Research Industries: Industry 4.0 to Industry 5.0
Advances. Wiley-IEEE Press.
McMillan G.K. and Vegas P.H. (2019) Process/Industrial Instruments and Controls
Handbook. 6th Ed. McGraw-Hill.
Patin N. (2016) Power Electronics Applied to Industrial Systems and Transports.
1st Ed. Elsevier.
Peacock B. and Badiru A.B. (2023) Industrial Engineering in Systems Design:
Guidelines, Practical Examples, Tools, and Techniques. 1st Ed. CRC Press.
Rehg J.A. and Sartori, G.J. (2005) Industrial Electronics . Prentice-Hall.
Sharma A., Jangir S.K., Kumar M., Choubey D.K., Shrivastava T. and Tan R.R., Aviso K.B.
and Promentilla M.A.B. (2018) Input-Output Models for Sustainable Industrial Systems:
Implementation Using Lingo (Lecture Notes in Management and Industrial Engineering).
Springer.
Wilamowski B.M. and Irwin J.D. (2011) The Industrial Electronic Handbook: Fundamentals
of Industrial Electronics . CRC Press.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
930
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
Future Industrial Systems: Opportunities and Challenges
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics
Intelligent Industrial Systems
International Journal of Industrial and Systems Engineering
Journal of Industrial and Systems Engineering
Journal of Industrial Information Integration
Journal of Industrial System Engineering and Management
Journal of Manufacturing Systems
Journal of Mechanical Design Transactions of the ASME
Technovation
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4016: Instrumentation and Control Systems
Unit 4019: Electrical and Electronic Principles.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
931
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025