Unit 5013: Embedded Systems
Unit Code: L/651/0867
Level: 5
Credits: 15
Introduction
Embedded systems are a key element of modern engineering systems, applied in
areas as diverse as agriculture, automotive, medical, and space, in industrial setting,
and in the home and office. In many cases, embedded systems are linked together
in networks and consist of a combination of hardware and software components to
performs specific functions. Embedded systems are the basis of modern engineering
design and practice, notably in machine-to-machine communication and the Internet
of Things (IoT).
This unit develops the knowledge of computer hardware, focussing on the small,
low-cost type of computer (i.e., a microcontroller ), that are used in embedded systems.
It then develops skill in selecting peripheral devices that operate external to the
microcontroller and interface with it; generally, these relate to sensors, actuators,
human interface, or data transfer. In parallel with this, students will be developing
programming skills, writing programmes which download straight to the
microcontroller, to interact with its external circuit. Students will also explore
the wider context of embedded systems, learning how they are applied in ‘hi-tech’
applications, in many cases revolutionising our ability to undertake certain activities.
Unit assessment will require the design, development, and testing of an embedded
system, to meet a given design brief; this will develop skills which are in much
demand in industry. A written assignment, exploring one or more of the many
fast-moving embedded system applications in use today, will also be completed.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
932
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Examine embedded system technology
LO2 Design an embedded system using available interfaces to perform a range
of functions
LO3 Implement embedded system design by writing code in an appropriate
programming language, to simulate, test and debug the system
LO4 Evaluate applications of embedded systems in the wider environment.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
933
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Examine embedded system technology
Embedded systems:
Embedded system overview
Embedded systems by example: Microcontroller/microprocessor based systems;
architecture, key units and peripherals, interfaces, memory etc.; industry case
studies
Embedded system design process
Hardware (CPU, memory, digital and analogue I/Os etc.)
Software (IDE, Python, simplified C/C++ etc.)
Communication protocols (network, wireless, IoT)
LO2 Design an embedded system using available interfaces to perform a range
of functions
Simple digital interfacing:
Arduino shields and carriers to utilise a range of components
Switches, light emitting diodes (LEDs), keypads, and 7-segment displays
DC load switching (e.g., of small motor or solenoid), use of PWM to provide
variable DC motor speed control
Interfacing to external devices
ADC application, including range and resolution.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
934
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO3 Implement embedded system design by writing code in an appropriate
programming language, to simulate, test and debug the system
The development cycle:
Integrated Development Environment (IDE), Assembler and High-Level
Languages, compilers, simulators, completing an in-circuit debug
Devising a code structure e.g., using flow diagrams and pseudo code.
Programming languages and codes:
Review of an appropriate high level programming languages Language
constructs − data types, programme flow, looping, branching, and conditional
statements etc.
Developing application code: initialisation, data input, conditional branching
and looping, data output
Latest IDEs for controller programming
Development using e.g.: Python, C/C++ or a suitable language/platform
Code simulation, download, test plans and testing (e.g. unit testing, system
testing, acceptance testing), and debug, troubleshoot.
LO4 Evaluate applications of embedded systems in the wider environment
Review of application of embedded systems:
Using example sectors e.g., motor vehicle, smart buildings, medical, office,
wearable. Review possible limiting factors in an embedded design e.g.,
power supply, reliability, security
Review of current trends in embedded systems, including the Internet of Things
(IOT), machine learning, cloud computing, artificial intelligence, sustainability,
green engineering and so on
Embedded systems for future societies
Review and select technologies for performance optimisation
Embedded systems and Industry 4.0/5.0. Integration and impact on
organisations
Suitability of embedded systems to meet accessibility, inclusive and diversity
considerations; application context, job roles, and engagement with stakeholder
groups.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
935
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Examine embedded system technology
P1 Examine the main M1 Analyse methods D1 Critically analyse the
architecture of a selected by which controllers microcontroller architecture
microcontroller. communicate with external selected in terms of its
environment limitations and suitability
P2 Explain the function of
for various applications.
the main microcontroller
elements.
LO2 Design an embedded system using available interfaces
to perform a range of functions
P3 For a given application, M2 Review selected devices D2 Critically appraise the
design an embedded system in terms of their functionality functionality of the entire
to meet the specified for a given design task. embedded system,
functional requirements. including further design
M3 Discuss the trade-off for
improvements.
the choices made in terms of
performance, power, cost
etc. to meet the given design
objectives.
LO3 Implement embedded system design by writing code in
an appropriate programming language, to simulate, test and
debug the system
P4 Implement an embedded M4 Produce a refined test D3 Evaluate a fully working
system by writing a well- plan to test all functions embedded system with real
structured code to perform a of the given system. peripherals, in discussion
selection of functions as per with a peer group of
the design. developers.
P5 Develop an initial test plan
to demonstrate a subset of
functionality of the proposed
system.
LO4 Evaluate applications of embedded systems in the wider
environment
P6 Evaluate current uses of M5 Explore emerging trends D4 Critically appraise
embedded systems in a in developing embedded ongoing research on future
chosen sector. systems, for example applications of embedded
artificial intelligence, systems, clearly identifying
the Internet of Things societal demands and
or sustainability. needs and recognising
technical and economic
factors in a global context.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
936
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Bertolotti C. and Hu T. (2020). Embedded Software Development: The Open-Source
Approach . 1st Ed. CRC Press
Blum J. (2019) Exploring Arduino: Tools and Techniques for Engineering Wizardry .
2nd Ed. Wiley
Cheich M. (2021) Arduino book for beginners . eBook. Kindle edition.
Hobbs C. (2020) Embedded Software Development for Safety-Critical Systems.
Auerbach Publications
Ibrahim D. (2019) ARM-based Microcontroller Projects Using mbed . 1st Ed. Newnes
Lacamera D. (2023) Embedded Systems Architecture . 2nd Ed. Packt Publishing
rd
Monk S. (2023) Programming Arduino: Getting Started with Sketches 3 Ed.
McGraw Hill TAB
Motahhir S. (2023) Smart Embedded Systems and Applications . 1st Ed. River Publishers
Pachari R.K., Pandey J.K., Sharmu A., Nautiyal O. and Ram M. (2021) Applied Soft
Computing and Embedded System Applications in Solar Energy . CRC Press
Rossi M., Toscani N. Mauri M. and Dezza F.C. (2022) Introduction to Microcontroller
Programming for Power Electronics Control Applications – Coding with MATLAB and
Simulink . 1st Ed. CRC Press
White E. (2023) Making Embedded Systems . 2nd Ed. O’Reilly Media, Inc.
Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
Design Automation for Embedded Systems
IEEE Embedded Systems Letters
IEEE Internet of Things Magazine
IEEE Internet of Things Journal
International Journal of Embedded Systems
Journal of Embedded Systems
Journal of System Architecture
Microprocessors and Microsystems
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
937
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 5019: Further Electrical, Electronic and Digital Principles
Unit 5021: Further Control Systems Engineering.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
938
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025