Unit 5014: Analogue Electronic Systems
Unit Code: M/651/0868
Level: 5
Credits: 15
Introduction
Analogue electronic systems are still widely used for a variety of very important
applications and this unit explores some of the specialist applications of this
technology.
The aim of this unit is to further develop students’ understanding of the application
of analogue devices in the design of electronic circuits. Students will investigate the
design and testing of electronic systems based on a sound theoretical knowledge
of the characteristics of electronic devices supported by Electronic Computer Aided
Design (ECAD) tools, and then construct and test sample physical circuits. Students
will be able to explain the characteristics of analogue and digital subsystems and the
representation and processing of information within them.
Upon completion of this unit students will be aware of techniques employed in the
design and evaluation of analogue subsystems used in the development of complete
electronic systems.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
939
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit a student will be able to:
LO1 Analyse single stage analogue amplifier circuits to predict and measure, by
simulation, the gain, frequency response and input and output resistances
LO2 Develop functional subsystems through an understanding of the characteristics
of operational amplifiers
LO3 Assess techniques for the conversion of signals between analogue and digital
formats
LO4 Design electronic circuits using physical components.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
940
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Analyse single stage analogue amplifier circuits to predict and measure, by
simulation, the gain, frequency response and input and output resistances
Bipolar Junction Transistor models:
The theory of operation of the Bipolar Junction Transistor (BJT), together with
DC biasing conditions of BJT for linear amplifier applications
Characteristics of common emitter, common collector and common base
amplifier configurations
DC h and small signal common emitter h-parameter model and the common
FE
emitter hydrid- π model of the BJT
Show g =~ I /26mV for silicon BJT at room temperature.
m C
Bipolar Junction Transistor small signal amplifiers:
Four-resistor BJT common-emitter amplifier analysis and its predicted DC and
AC voltage gain
ECAD tools to be used to determine the mid-band voltage gain and input and
output resistances.
The effect of input, output and emitter decoupling capacitors and tuned L-C
collector load.
Bipolar Junction Transistor large signal amplifiers:
Class A, B, AB, C and D amplifiers and applications
Use of ECAD to investigate the characteristics of a sample power amplifier circuit
to include frequency response.
Field Effect Transistor models:
The theory of operation of the Field Effect Transistor (FET) and the Metal Oxide
Semiconductor FET (MOSFET)
Application of FETs and MOSFETs in switching circuits and linear amplifiers,
including complementary MOSFET stages
Apply FET AC equivalent circuit models
Examples of specific applications of FET that have been developed for specialist
applications
Use of ECAD tools, to simulate and analyse the behaviour of switching and linear
amplifier circuits.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
941
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO2 Develop functional subsystems through an understanding of the
characteristics of operational amplifiers
Operational amplifier:
Components and characteristics
Circuit configuration and operation
Ideal operational amplifier model, specifications of practical operational
amplifiers
Characteristics of the operational amplifier with negative feedback applied.
Operational amplifier applications:
Description of a range of subsystems, including the voltage comparator, linear
voltage regulator, switched mode voltage regulator, differentiator, integrator,
active filters, Schmitt trigger and Schmitt oscillator
Sub-system specifications and evaluations in time and frequency domains,
as appropriate
Use of ECAD tools to simulate and analyse the behaviour above listed circuits.
LO3 Assess techniques for the conversion of signals between analogue and
digital formats
The characteristics of information represented electronically:
Comparison of the implications of capturing, processing and storing information
represented by analogue signals and by digital data, including amplitude range,
frequency range, accuracy, resolution, linearity, drift, noise and signal-to-noise
ratio.
Digital to analogue convertors (DAC) and analogue to digital converters ADC):
Evaluation and comparison of digital to analogue converters using calculations
and simulation based on the binary weighted resistor, the R/2R ladder network
techniques, successive approximation, segmented configuration, to also include
an introduction to delta-sigma convertor
Evaluate and compare of analogue to digital converters based on the single
ramp, successive approximation and parallel comparator (flash) techniques,
sigma-delta and delta-sigma
Examples of commercially available converters and the implementation of
analogue input and output ports to digital processing devices found within
embedded systems.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
942
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO4 Design electronic circuits using physical components
Sub-system design, implementation, and evaluation:
Examples of electronic subsystems
Development of specifications to achieve a predefined function Design the
circuits to achieve this function including components selection (resistors,
capacitors, inductors, transistors, diodes, op-amps, sensors, and connectors)
as well as input and output signals to be used for circuit testing in simulation
and bench testing
Simulation of design using ECAD tools
Implementation, integration, and evaluation aspects
Building of circuits as designed, application of a range of appropriate bench tests
to evaluate its operation, and comparing its actual operation to the design
specifications and the simulation results.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
943
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Analyse single stage analogue amplifier circuits to
predict and measure, by simulation, the gain, frequency
response and input and output resistances
P1 Analyse key aspects of M1 Discuss assumptions D1 Propose and implement
single stage amplifier circuits and discrepancies between justified and operable
through calculations and simulation results and recommendations for
simulation to produce input circuit calculations. changes to the
and output waveforms. specifications of the circuits
and repeat the simulation
to produce improved
results.
LO2 Develop functional subsystems through an
understanding of the characteristics of operational amplifiers
P2 Develop the key M2 Design operational D2 Communicate to
components of an operational amplifier subsystems specialist audiences the
amplifier configuration with simulated in time and use of manufacturers’ data
negative feedback. frequency domains. sheets, including critical
parameters for component
P3 Determine the operation M3 Critically analyse
selection in practical circuits
of subsystems from the ideal simulation results with
design.
model of the operational reference to the expected
amplifier and by simulation results.
for a range of input signals.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
944
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Pass Merit Distinction
LO3 Assess techniques for the conversion of signals between
analogue and digital formats
P4 Assess the limitations of M4 Evaluate the D3 Create a given range
representing information in characteristics and the of DAC circuit simulations
both analogue and digital limitations of specific to critically evaluate the
form. converter topologies and implications of resolution
their example applications. and conversion time on
P5 Specify the technical
accuracy and noise.
characteristics of converters in
terms of meeting a given set of
requirements.
LO4 Design electronic circuits using physical components
P6 Design an electronic circuit
M5 Critically analyse design D4 Present circuit designs
supported by a written
equations, simulation, and to specialist audiences,
description.
bench test results ensuring showing the variation
discrepancies are recorded of circuit function in
P7 Simulate a working
and explained using simulations as a result
electronic circuit using a set
graphical representation. of design changes or
of chosen components.
component tolerances.
P8 Construct and test the
design on the bench with a
justification of the testing
method.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
945
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Bird Jo. (2022) Bird’s Electrical Circuit Theory and Technology . 7th Ed. Routledge
Bishop 0 (2021) Electronics: A First Course . 3rd Ed. Routledge.
Bugg D.V. (2021) Electronics: Circuits, Amplifiers and Gates . 2nd Ed. CRC Press.
Makarov S., Ludwig, R. and Bitar, SJ. (2019) Practical Electric Engineering. 2nd Ed.
Springer
Lathi B.P. and Zhi D. (2009) Modern Digital and Analog Communications Systems.
Oxford Series in Electrical and Computer Engineering. 4th Ed. Oxford University Press.
Storey N. (2013) Electronics: A Systems Approach . 5th Ed. Pearson.
Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
Analogue Design Journal
Analog Integrated Circuits and Signal Processing
IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4019: Electrical and Electronic Principles
Unit 4022: Electronic Circuits and Devices
Unit 5019: Further Electrical, Electronic and Digital Principles.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
946
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025