Unit 5015: Manufacturing Systems
Engineering
Unit Code: J/615/1516
Level: 5
Credits: 15
Introduction
Manufacturing systems engineering is concerned with the design and on-going
operation and enhancement of the integrated elements within a manufacturing
system, which is a very complex activity, even for simple products. The art of
manufacturing systems engineering is essentially designing systems that can cope
with that complexity effectively.
The aim of this unit is to develop students’ understanding of that complexity within
a modern manufacturing environment. Among the topics covered in this unit are:
elements that make up a manufacturing system, including production engineering,
plant and maintenance engineering, product design, logistics, production planning
and control, forecast quality assurance, accounting and purchasing, all of which work
together within the manufacturing system to create products that meet customers’
requirements.
On successful completion of this unit students will be able to explain the principles
of a manufacturing system and consider how to design improvements. They will be
introduced to all the elements that make up a modern manufacturing system, and
they will learn how to optimise the operation of existing systems through discerning
use of monitoring data. Some of the elements will be developed in greater depth;
of particular importance will be looking at the systems of production planning and
control, which are the day-to-day tools used to manage the manufacturing system
effectively.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
947
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit a student will be able to:i
LO1 Illustrate the principles of manufacturing systems engineering and explain their
relevance to the design and enhancement of manufacturing systems
LO2 Use a range of analysis tools, including value stream mapping, to determine the
effectiveness and efficiency of a manufacturing system, and then develop an
appropriate future state for that system
LO3 Outline the impact of different production planning approaches on the
effectiveness of a manufacturing system
LO4 Define the responsibilities of manufacturing systems engineering and review
how they enable successful organisations to remain competitive.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
948
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Illustrate the principles of manufacturing systems engineering and their
relevance to the design and enhancement of manufacturing systems
Manufacturing systems elements:
Elements to be considered include quality, cost, delivery performance and
optimising output
Problem-solving and managing complexity, maintenance scheduling and
planning, resource planning and productivity
Effect of testing and data analysis on performance.
LO2 Use a range of analysis tools, including value stream mapping, to
determine the effectiveness and efficiency of a manufacturing system,
and then develop an appropriate future state for that system
Analysis tools:
Introduction to value stream mapping, and the value of both current state
mapping and future state mapping
Bottle-neck analysis, by using process improvement tools and techniques
e.g. value stream analysis, simulation, kanban
Using key performance indicators to understand the performance of a
manufacturing system e.g. overall equipment effectiveness, lead-time, cycle time,
waiting time, yield, delivery performance, safety metrics
Reviewing key performance indicators; methods for presenting metrics and
performance e.g. balanced scorecards, performance dashboards, Andon boards,
Gemba walks.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
949
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO3 Outline the impact of different production planning approaches on the
effectiveness of a manufacturing system
Production planning approaches:
Examples of production planning strategy: push vs pull factors, kanban systems,
make to stock, make to order and engineer to order
Production planning approaches such as batch and queue, pull/kanban, just-in-
time, modular design, configuration at the final point, and master scheduling.
Production planning management tools:
Enterprise Resource Mapping (ERP) systems, Material Resource Planning (MRP 2)
and Manufacturing Execution systems, ability to managing complexity and
resourcing through information technology
Industrial engineering issues: the importance of standard times and the impact
on productivity and the costing of products. Standard work underpins the
repeatability of process and quality control.
LO4 Review the functions of manufacturing systems engineering and how they
enable successful organisations to remain competitive.
Effectiveness of manufacturing systems:
Plant layout design, planning and control, productivity and continuous
improvement, quality control and equipment effectiveness
Return on investment and capital expenditure, control of the cost of planned
maintenance
Manufacturing information technology: the supply of data from the process to
decision-makers e.g. failure modes for both product and system, maintenance
and down time data, standard times for production, material control, energy
usage.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
950
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Illustrate the principles of manufacturing systems
engineering and their relevance to the design and
enhancement of manufacturing systems
P1 Illustrate the principles of M1 Evaluate the impact D1 Apply value stream
manufacturing engineering. that manufacturing systems mapping to a production
have on the success of a process to evaluate the
P2 Explain the relevance
manufacturing organisation. efficiency of that process by
of manufacturing systems
using the current state map
engineering to the design of
to suggest improvements.
a manufacturing system.
LO2 Use a range of analysis tools, including value stream
mapping, to determine the effectiveness and efficiency of
a manufacturing system, and then develop an appropriate
future state for that system
P3 Apply value stream M2 Identify optimisation D2 Review value stream
mapping to visualise a opportunities through value mapping against other
production process. stream mapping of a production planning
production process. methodologies and justify
its use as a production
planning tool.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
951
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Pass Merit Distinction
LO3 Outline the impact of different production planning
approaches on the effectiveness of a manufacturing system
P4 Identify the common M3 Evaluate the D3 Justify the most
production planning effectiveness of production appropriate production
approaches and state their planning methods. planning technique and its
impact on manufacturing suitability for a particular
M4 Explore the effectiveness
systems. manufacturing approach,
of common production
such as make to stock, make
P5 Define the types of planning techniques to
to order, or engineer to
manufacturing approach, identify which production
order.
such as make to stock, approach they complement.
make to order and engineer
to order.
LO4 Review the functions of manufacturing systems
engineering and how they enable successful organisations
to remain competitive.
P6 Define the core
M5 Evaluate the impact that D4 Critically consider the
responsibilities of a
a manufacturing systems elements of an existing
manufacturing systems
engineering has on manufacturing system to
engineer. successful manufacturing appraise why this is
organisations. successful.
P7 Identify the key
contributing success factors
of a manufacturing system.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
952
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Bicheno, J. and Holweg, M. (2009) The Lean Toolbox . 4th Ed. PICSIE Books.
Chopra, S. and Meindl, P. (2015) Supply Chain Management: Strategy, Planning,
and Operation (Global Edition). 6th Ed. Pearson.
Groover P. M. (2019) Fundamentals of Modern Manufacturing: Materials, Processes,
and Systems . 7th Ed. Wiley.
Huang Y., Wang L., and Liang S. Y. (2019) Handbook of Manufacturing. World Scientific
Publishing Company.
Kalpakjian S. and Schmid S. (2022) Manufacturing Engineering and Technology . 8th Ed.
Pearson.
Slack, N. (2013) Operations Management . 7th Ed. Pearson.
Womack, J., Jones, D. and Roos, D. (1990) The Machine That Changed the World .
Free Press.
Websites
http://www.industryweek.com/ Industry Week
Five Benefits of an MES
(Article)
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 5016: Lean Manufacturing
Unit 5017: Advanced Manufacturing Technology
Unit 5018: Sustainability.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
953
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025