Unit 5016: Lean Manufacturing
Unit Code: M/651/0877
Level: 5
Credits: 15
Introduction
Lean manufacturing is a systematic approach to minimising waste in a manufacturing
system, by focusing on the activities that add the most value through the eyes of the
customer. The basis of lean manufacturing originated in the car industry and was
developed by Toyota in Japan. Lean is now used extensively worldwide, in all types
and size of organisation, to improve international competitiveness. It is therefore
crucial for manufacturing engineers to be able to design and operate manufacturing
systems that employ lean successfully.
The aim of this unit is to introduce students to the principles and processes of lean
manufacturing, so that they can become an effective and committed practitioner of
lean in whatever industry sector they are employed in. To do this, the unit will explore
the tools and techniques that are applied by organisations practicing lean. The
students will consider both the benefits and challenges of using lean manufacturing,
and become sufficiently knowledgeable about the most important process tools and
techniques to be able to operate and use them.
Among the topics included in this unit are: scoping and defining lean manufacturing,
the benefits and challenges of adopting Lean thinking, , common tools and techniques
associated with lean manufacturing and process improvement, and the most
appropriate improvement tool(s) to tackle a problem.
On successful completion of this unit students will be able to learn about the common
principles of lean manufacturing. a range of the process improvement tools used
within lean manufacturing, and effective communication skills in order to lead the
process of continuous improvement across an organisation.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
954
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Examine the common principles of lean manufacturing and how the
implementation of a lean production system contributes to business success
LO2 Evaluate the lean approach applied to the modern manufacturing environment
LO3 Specify a range of the process improvement tools used within lean
manufacturing
LO4 Demonstrate effective communication skills in order to lead the process of
continuous improvement across an organisation.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
955
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Examine the common principles of lean manufacturing and how the
implementation of a lean production system contributes to business
success
Scoping and defining lean manufacturing:
The common principles of lean manufacturing philosophy
Origins of lean, Toyota production system.
Defining lean and its importance to the customer
Identifying and eliminating material and process waste that adds no value
from the customer’s perspective
Standardization, line balancing and Takt time.
Benefits and challenges of adopting lean:
Why an organisation would consider adopting a lean philosophy
Productivity, quality, customer satisfaction, delivery performance
The benefits of a lean organisation to the customer, the employees,
and the shareholders
Outline the benefits of lean in terms of cost, quality, delivery, customer
satisfaction, management complexity and cost to serve
Challenges of implementation: change management, managing expectation,
empowerment, motivation, ‘burning platform’, investment, supply chain.
LO2 Evaluate the lean approach applied to the modern manufacturing
environment.
Lean Production Systems:
Toyota lean production system and other modern lean production systems for
manufacturing
Research lean manufacturing and identify its fundamental elements and the
motivation behind creation
Compare Lean thinking with the recognised theory and production systems
publicised by other global manufacturers: how do they differ and how they are
similar?
How the common principles are now being adopted outside manufacturing
Consider the core principles of lean thinking to support Industry 4.0.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
956
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO3 Specify a range of the process improvement tools used within lean
manufacturing
Common tools and techniques associated with lean manufacturing and process
improvement:
Six Sigma, 8 Wastes, Workplace organisation such as 5S’s (sort, set in order,
shine, standardise and sustain), Kaizen, continuous flow, kanban (pull System),
just-in-time (JIT), lean simulation activities, value stream mapping, Poke Yoke
(error proofing), 5 Whys (Root Cause Analysis), Total Preventive Maintenance
(TPM), Total Quality Management (TQM)
Plan-do-check-act (PDCA), Single Minute Exchange of Die (SMED), A3 Reporting,
Visual Management.
Selecting the most appropriate improvement tool to tackle a problem:
Tools for improving quality and delivery. Types of faults/defects recorded and
analysed to improve future performance, Failure Mode and Effects Analysis
(FMEA), Fishbone, Practical Problem Solving (PPS), Process Failure Mode and
Effects Analysis (PFMEA)
Equipment needed to perform data collection and analysis, e.g., automatic test
equipment, visual automatic inspection system, data acquisition equipment,
software programmes to analyse the data and inform operators in real time,
analysis and interpretation of data for documentation such as Parts Per Million
(PPM and quality adherence.
Use of Industry 4.0 tools/technologies and integration (e.g. automation, robots,
PLCs, digital systems and manufacturing engineering systems).
LO4 Demonstrate effective communication skills in order to lead the process of
continuous improvement across an organisation
Communication:
Facilitate a small group in the application and use of one of the lean tools
(e.g., 5 Whys technique, A3 Report)
Evaluate factors that influence engagement within a group, facilitation skills
development, address continuous improvement and change management
processes.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
957
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Examine the common principles of lean manufacturing
and how the implementation of a lean production system
contributes to business success
P1 Examine how lean M1 Analyse the benefits of D1 Critically evaluate
manufacturing principles adopting lean manufacturing. the advantages and
can improve business disadvantages of
M2 Analyse the key challenges
performance. implementing a lean
encountered when
production system.
implementing lean
manufacturing.
LO2 Evaluate the lean approach applied to the modern
manufacturing environment
P2 Evaluate the key principle M3 Assess key barriers to D2 Evaluate lean elements
of lean thinking that will the implementation of lean that are critical in making
support the next industrial thinking into the modern the approach successful in
revolution. manufacturing environment. supporting Industry 4.0.
P3 Research and assess
alternatives to lean
production system
approaches.
P4 Examine the origins of
lean and specify its early
applications.
LO3 Specify a range of the process improvement tools used
within lean manufacturing
P5 Specify which tools are M4 Evaluate how the most D3 Develop a justified
commonly associated with common lean tools can be recommendation for a
lean manufacturing and applied to eliminate waste lean tool to be applied in
what contexts they would in a manufacturing process. addressing a specified
be applied in. process improvement.
LO4 Demonstrate effective communication skills in order to
lead the process of continuous improvement across an
organisation
P6 Demonstrate skills in M5 Evaluate the impact of this D4 Critically evaluate the
developing a communication communication approach, importance of the higher
approach to manage change including an evaluation of order skills required to
in an organisation. impact on employees and successfully deploy
personal effectiveness. change for continuous
improvement in an
organisation.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
958
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Ajay, Singh H., Parveen and Almangour B. (Editors) (2023) Handbook of Smart
Manufacturing − Forecasting the Future of Industry 4.0. 1st Ed. CRC Press.
Blackwell D., George M.L. and Rajan D. (2019) Lean Six Sigma in the Age of Artificial
Intelligence: Harnessing the Power of the Fourth Industrial Revolution. 1st Ed. McGraw-Hill.
Cudney E.A., Furterer S. and Dietrich D. (Editors) (2021) Lean Systems − Applications and
Case Studies in Manufacturing, Service, and Healthcare. CRC Press.
Díaz-Reza J.R., García-Alcaraz J.L. and García A.S.M. (2022) Best Practices in Lean
Manufacturing: A Relational Analysis. Springer.
Dillon A.P. (2019) A study of the Toyota production system: From an Industrial Engineering
Viewpoint. Routledge.
Pink S. (2022) Emerging Technologies/Life at the Edge of the Future. 1st Ed. Routledge.
Silva F. and Ferreira P.L. (2019) Lean Manufacturing: Implementation, Opportunities and
Challenges . Nova Science Publishers.
Tarantino A. (2022) Smart Manufacturing: The Lean Six Sigma Way. Wiley.
Vinodh S. (2023 ) Lean Manufacturing: Fundamentals, Tools, Approaches, and Industry 4.0
Integration. 1st Ed. CRC Press.
Womack, J., Jones, D. and Roos, D. (1990) The Machine That Changed the World .
Free Press.
Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
International Journal of Engineering Business Management
International Journal of Lean Six Sigma
International Journal of Technology (Lean Manufacturing Articles)
Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing
Journal of Manufacturing Processes
Quality Magazine: Lean Manufacturing
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
959
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 5015: Manufacturing Systems Engineering
Unit 5017: Advanced Manufacturing Technology
Unit 5018: Sustainability.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
960
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025