Unit 5017: Advanced Manufacturing
Unit Code: D/651/0880
Level: 5
Credits: 15
Introduction
The ability of successful companies to meet the growing demand of customers is
heavily influenced by the development of advanced manufacturing technologies.
Customers expect high complexity products, on demand, and with a growing element
of customisation. In adopting advanced manufacturing technologies, successful
companies will ensure faster time to market of new products, improve products and
processes, use new, sustainable, materials, and customise to customer requirements.
Manufacturing systems engineering underpins this development.
In order to meet changing customer expectations and gain competitive advantage,
focus needs to be applied to developing smart factories and advanced manufacturing
technologies. Manufacturing organisations will seek integration between
manufacturing technology, high performance computing, the internet, and the
product at all stages of its life cycle.
The unit will introduce Industry 4.0, the term that has been adopted to describe the
‘fourth’ industrial revolution currently underway, at present, in the manufacturing and
commercial sectors of our society. It is a revolution based on the integration of cyber-
physical systems with the Internet of Things and services. For the manufacturing
sector, this integration has been enabled by successfully combining high performance
computing, the internet and the development of advanced manufacturing
technologies. Industry 4.0 is changing the way the world’s most successful companies
produce the products that their global customers demand.
On successful completion of this unit students will be able to analyse the use of a
range of advanced manufacturing technologies to improve the competitive advantage
of the organisations adopting them; digitalisation trends in advanced manufacturing
technologies; and develop their own research activities into the latest developments.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
961
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Examine a range of advanced manufacturing processes and their effective
application
LO2 Contrast advanced manufacturing technologies to determine their
appropriateness for an application or process.
LO3 Analyse an existing manufactured product and associated process to introduce
proposals for possible improvements based on the introduction of advanced
manufacturing technologies.
LO4 Evaluate the concept of the next industrial revolution to determine the impact
on both manufacturers and the consumer.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
962
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Examine a range of advanced manufacturing processes and their effective
application
Manufacturing processes:
Subtractive machining, Pressing and forming, casting, and moulding, joining and
soldering, mixing, final assembly, packaging, material handling, quality
control/inspection.
Advanced manufacturing processes:
Additive manufacture process, fused deposition modelling, selective laser
sintering, selective laser melting, Stereolithography, Powder bed and inkjet head
3D printing.
Thermal processes: Laser Beam Machining, Plasma Arc Machining, Electron
Beam Machining
Mechanical processes: Abrasive Jet Machining Abrasive Water Jet Machining
Abrasive Flow Machining, hybrid CNC machining (e.g. Millturn)
Hybrid manufacturing processes: additive manufacture and mechanical
machining, welding and mechanical milling, laser cutting and electro-discharge
machining.
Micro and Nano machining processes.
Types of application or industry:
Industry examples: aerospace, automotive, healthcare, electronics, food and
beverage, chemical and pharmaceutical, minerals, oil and gas, retail, fashion
Application examples: assembly, joining, moulding, soldering.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
963
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO2 Contrast advanced manufacturing technologies to determine their
appropriateness for an application or process
Manufacturing technologies:
High precision robotics and automation: healthcare (components and
processes), aerospace, automotive, process control and visualisation through
automation technology
Improvement in productivity through greater automation
Quality of manufacturing processes improved through integration of robotics
The application of hybrid processes in the manufacturing and repair of complex
components (e.g. the use Hybrid Machine Combining Milling and Additive
Manufacturing to manufacture rapid tooling such as moulds and dies).
Examples of using 3D printing and other forms of additive manufacturing to
produce medical equipment, spares parts for items that may have become
obsolete, mass customisation; what the customer wants, when they want it.
Hybrid Additive manufacturing technology (e.g., replacing forming, moulding,
pressing), impact on rapid prototyping, availability of spares/obsolete parts,
medical components available and customised.
LO3 Analyse an existing manufactured product and associated process to
introduce proposals for possible improvements based on the introduction
of advanced manufacturing technologies
Manufactured product:
Research the traditional methods used to manufacture an existing product,
determine the associated processes required to bring it to market and identify
the limitations of these methods and processes
Explore how advanced manufacturing technology could be applied to produce
this product and suggest how applying such processes would influence its
production, environmental impact, costs, time to market and customer
satisfaction (e.g., healthcare/medical such as hip joint, traditional method
vs mass customisation and the possible use of additive layer manufacture)
Additive layer manufacture and its availability is opening up new markets,
but also new business models for organisations; explore the future possibilities
for self-serve/or self-production of items.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
964
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO4 Evaluate the concept of the next industrial revolution to determine the
impact on both manufacturers and the consumer
Key technological drivers and Industry 4.0:
Industry 4.0 – latest developments and future trends in advanced manufacturing
sector
Internet of Things: over time industry has transformed from being local-based to
communication-based technology; the possibilities for connected technology and
connected factories are ever increasing
Cyber-physical systems: collaborative robotics and highly integrated
manufacturing systems
Mass customisation: growing demand and desire for individual products;
advanced manufacturing technology and the ability to manage complexity
Digitalisation and increased automation; the ability to simulate and create
a digital twin has the potential to dramatically reduce time to market
The drive to increase efficiency requires innovation and innovative technology;
Net zero, renewable energies, and waste reduction
Uses and trends in data collection systems, data formats, data analytics and
dashboards
Big data; the development of an ever-connected production environment
alongside cloud computing; challenges with a stream of production data and the
need to analyse this in order to make timely informed decisions Discussion in
groups involving industry case studies and impact of trending innovations.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
965
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Examine a range of advanced manufacturing processes
and their effective application
P1 Examine any two advanced M1 Compare a traditional D1 Research and evaluate a
manufacturing processes or manufacturer to one manufactured product and
technologies with examples of employing advanced identify the technology
where they are most effective. manufacturing to discuss used.
the fundamental
differences.
LO2 Contrast advanced manufacturing technologies to
determine their appropriateness for an application or
process
P2 Contrast advanced M2 Explore how advanced D2 Examine the potential
manufacturing technologies manufacturing could be justification for an
to determine their applied, and give examples organisation to invest in
appropriateness for an of where technology would advanced manufacturing
application or process. be suited. technology.
LO3 Analyse an existing manufactured product and
associated process to introduce proposals for possible
improvements based on the introduction of advanced
manufacturing technologies
P3 Analyse an existing M3 Evaluate the D3 Critically evaluate the
manufactured product and effectiveness of the current impact on both the
the key technology used to method to suggest an customer and the
produce the item. alternative advanced manufacturer of using
manufacturing technology. advanced manufacturing
technology rather than the
existing method.
LO4 Evaluate the key technological drivers of Industry 4.0 −
the next industrial revolution to determine the impact on
both manufacturers and the consumer
P4 Evaluate the concept of a M4 Evaluate the impact of D4 Justify the types of
4th industrial revolution. advanced manufacturing on industry or product that
both manufacturers and the would benefit most from
P5 Examine the key
customer. an innovative advanced
technological drivers
manufacturing approach.
for Industry 4.0.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
966
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Ajay, Singh H., Parveen and Almangour B. (Editors) (2023) Handbook of Smart
Manufacturing − Forecasting the Future of Industry 4.0. 1st Ed. CRC Press.
Baudin M. and Netland T. (2023) Introduction to Manufacturing − An Industrial
Engineering and Management Perspective. 1st Ed. Routledge.
Brauer D. and Cesarone J. (2022) Total Manufacturing Assurance − Controlling Product
Quality, Reliability, and Safety. 2nd Ed. CRC Press.
Cheng F.T. (Editor) (2021) Industry 4.1: Intelligent Manufacturing with Zero Defects.
Wiley-IEEE Press.
Groover M.P. (2016) Automation, Production Systems, and Computer-Integrated
Manufacturing. 4th Ed. Pearson Higher Education.
Gupta K. and Salonitis K. (Editors) (2021) Sustainable Manufacturing. 1st Ed. Elsevier.
Kalpakjian S. and Schmid S. (2022) Manufacturing Engineering and Technology in SI Units.
8th Ed. Pearson.
Liker J.K. (2020) The Toyota Way, Second Edition: 14 Management Principles from the
World’s Greatest Manufacturer. 2nd Ed. McGraw-Hill.
Patel C.D. and chen C.H. (Editors) (2024) Digital Manufacturing − Key Elements of a Digital
Factory. 1st Ed. Elsevier.
Popkova E.G., Ragulina Y.V. and Bogoviz A.V. (Editors) (2019). Industry 4.0: Industrial
revolution of the 21st century (Vol. 169, p. 249). Cham: Springer.
Pruncu C.I. and zbitou J. (2023) Advanced Manufacturing Methods − Smart Processes
and Modeling for Optimization . 1st Ed. CRC Press.
Singh C.D. and kaur H. (Editors) (2023) Factories of the Future: Technological
Advancements in the Manufacturing Industry . Wiley.
Steenhuis H.J. (2024) The Business of Additive Manufacturing − 3D Printing and the
4th Industrial Revolution . 1st Ed. Routledge.
Youssef H.A., El-Hofy H.A. and Ahmed M.H. (2024) Manufacturing Technology −
Materials, Processes, and Equipment. 2nd Ed. CRC Press.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
967
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
Additive Manufacturing
Additive Manufacturing Letters
Advances in Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering
Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Systems
Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology
Journal of Manufacturing Processes
Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology
Journal of Manufacturing Systems
Manufacturing Letters
The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 5015: Manufacturing Systems Engineering
Unit 5016: Lean Manufacturing
Unit 5018: Sustainability.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
968
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025