Unit 5018: Sustainability
Unit Code: Y/615/1519
Level: 5
Credits: 15
Introduction
Living and working in the 21st century will bring a range of sustainability challenges
that our society has not seen before. For many people on our planet key resources
such as food, water and energy will be in short supply, whilst the effects of climate
change will be felt by everyone.
The Brundtland Commission of the United Nations on 20th March 20th 1987 defined
sustainability as: ‘sustainable development is development that meets the needs of
the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own
needs’. Engineers will be in the frontline of the battle to overcome the challenges of
creating a sustainable economy, but no single discipline will have the capability to
tackle the problems alone. Sustainability is a multidisciplinary challenge, and
engineers of the future will have to work collaboratively with a whole range of other
stakeholders, such as scientists, politicians and financiers, if they are to be able to
produce the practical and technological solutions required within the necessarily
urgent time scales.
This unit is designed to support the Professional Engineering and Professional
Engineering Management core units at Level 4 and 5. On successful completion of
this unit the student with possess a wide range of knowledge and understanding
of the issues and topics associated with sustainability and low carbon engineering.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
969
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Determine the nature and scope of the technical challenges of ensuring
sustainable development
LO2 Articulate the importance of collaborating with other disciplines in developing
technical solutions to sustainability problems
LO3 Evaluate the use of alternative energy generation techniques in relation to their
contribution to a low carbon economy
LO4 Analyse a variety of data sources to estimate the carbon footprint of a socio-
technical scenario.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
970
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Determine the nature and scope of the technical challenges of ensuring
sustainable development
The scope and social context of sustainability:
Sustainable development
Brundtland definition
Global demographics, trends and predictions
Population growth
Standard of living, actual and expected
Urbanisation and the balance of urban/rural space
Sustainable design.
Environmental issues:
°
Climate change, planetary energy balance, carbon cycle science, the 2 C climate
change obligation
Carbon capture and sequestration
Pollution, pollution prevention and management
Carbon trading
Eco-systems and habitat.
Resources:
Food, water, energy and raw materials.
LO2 Articulate the importance of collaborating with other disciplines in
developing technical solutions to sustainability problems
Systems thinking and socio-technical systems:
The politics and economics of sustainability
Kyoto Protocol
UN Climate Change Conference (COP)
European Union Emissions Trading Scheme.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
971
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Sustainable infrastructures:
Low carbon transport systems
Sustainable cities
Green building
Power storage and distribution
Sustainable logistics
Waste and recycling.
LO3 Evaluate the use of alternative energy generation techniques in
relationship to their contribution to a low carbon economy
Alternative energy resources:
Nuclear, solar, wind, tidal and wave, geothermal, biomass and bioenergy
Whole life cycle costing
Precautionary principle.
LO4 Analyse a variety of data sources to estimate the carbon footprint of a
socio-technical scenario.
Types of carbon footprint:
Organisational
Value chain
Product
Carbon footprint science
Calculation methodologies: direct and indirect
System boundaries
Case study examples.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
972
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Determine the nature and scope of the technical
challenges of ensuring sustainable development
P1 Determine the nature M1 Review existing D1 Critically analyse how the
and scope of the technical sustainable development interrelationship between
challenges of ensuring plans to identify the way the three key areas of
sustainable development, technical challenges are technical challenges can be
considering environmental, met and overcome. managed systemically to
resource and demand ensure maximum
issues. sustainability.
LO2 Articulate the importance of collaborating with other
disciplines in developing technical solutions to sustainability
problems
P2 Articulate the M2 Analyse how political and D2 Critically analyse how
interdisciplinary issues economic issues can impact a systemic approach can
associated with the upon technical solutions. be used to support
construction of sustainable interdisciplinary
infrastructures, with collaboration in developing
attention to the competing sustainable infrastructures.
pressures within these
infrastructures.
LO3 Evaluate the use of alternative energy generation
techniques in relation to their contribution to a low carbon
economy
P3 Evaluate the issues that M3 Analyse the difficulties in D3 Critically analyse the
need to be considered when the evaluation and selection selection of alternative
selecting alternative low of alternative energy energy generation
carbon energy sources. generation techniques for techniques for a low carbon
a low carbon economy. economy within the wider
socio-technical sustainability
agenda.
LO4 Analyse a variety of data sources to estimate the
carbon footprint of a socio-technical scenario.
P4 Evaluate a variety of data M4 Apply appropriate data D4 Analyse the alternative
sources to estimate the from a range of options types and methods available
carbon footprint of a to calculate the carbon for calculating the carbon
number of socio-technical footprint of a socio-technical footprint of a sociotechnical
scenarios. scenario. scenario, and make justified
recommendations, selecting
P5 Describe the process
a best-fit method for
of calculating a carbon
effective comparison
footprint.
of systems.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
973
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Bakhshi R. B. (2019) Sustainable Engineering: Principles and Practice . 3rd Ed.
Cambridge University Press.
Berners-Lee, M. (2019) There Is No Planet B: A Handbook for the Make or Break Years
Cambridge University Press
Berners-Lee, M. (2010) How Bad Are Bananas? Profile Books.
Boyle, G. (2012) Energy Systems and Sustainability: Power for a Sustainable Future .
Oxford University Press.
Everett B., Peake S., and warren J. (2021) Energy Systems and Sustainability .
3rd Ed. Oxford University Press.
Fenner, A. and Ainger, C. (2013) Sustainable Infrastructures: Principles into Practice .
ICE Publishing.
Helm, D. (2015) The Carbon Crunch: Why we are Getting Climate Change Wrong and How
to Fix It . Yale University Press.
°
Hone, D. (2014) Putting the Genie Back: 2 c Will Be Harder Than We Think .
Whitefox Publishing.
Morris P. and Therivel R. (2009) Methods of Environmental Impact Assessment .
3rd Ed. London Routledge.
Websites
http://www.carbontrust.com Carbon Trust Carbon foot printing
(General Reference)
http://www.fern.org/ FERN Trading Carbon How it Works
and Why it is Controversial
(Ebook)
https://www.populationinstitute.org Population Institute Demographic
Vulnerability report
(Report)
http://www.un.org/ United Nations Integrating Population
Issues into Sustainable Development
(Report)
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
974
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



http://www.unwater.org/ United Nations Water Annual World
Water Development Report
(Report)
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/ United Nations Sustainable
Development Knowledge Platform
(General Reference)
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4004: Managing a Professional Engineering Project
Unit 5002: Professional Engineering Management.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
975
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025