Unit 5019: Further Electrical, Electronic
and Digital Principles
Unit Code: H/651/0882
Level: 5
Credits: 15
Introduction
Almost every aspect of our lives relies on electrically powered, electronically
controlled machines and devices, many of them digital in format. To properly
understand how to make the most efficient use of these devices in a safe and
economical way, it is vital to have a thorough knowledge of the underlying principles
on which they rely.
This unit builds on the preliminary techniques and skills introduced in
Unit 4019: Electrical, Electronic Principles and Unit 4020: Digital Principles .
The emphasis in this unit will be in developing a structured approach to the analysis
of AC single-phase and three-phase powered circuitry. This will help students to
arrive at the solution in the most efficient way, with the greatest probability of it being
correct. In addition, students will be introduced to the expanding use of computers,
using specialised software to solve electrical, electronic, and digital circuits. This will
allow students to develop the necessary confidence and competence in the four key
areas of mathematical techniques, circuit analysis, circuit simulation and laboratory
practice.
Successful completion of this unit will enable students to manage increasingly
complex problems and prepare them for the challenge of Level 6 academic
programmes.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
976
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Solve a range of electrical and electronic problems by applying appropriate
circuit theorems and mathematical methods
LO2 Apply appropriate methods to analyse and solve three-phase network
problems
LO3 Examine analogue and digital circuits using appropriate laboratory and
simulation techniques
LO4 Explain the characteristics of non-linear circuits to predict their behaviour under
a variety of conditions
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
977
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Solve a range of electrical and electronic problems by applying appropriate
circuit theorems and mathematical methods
Formal steady state circuit analysis:
Determinants, mesh analysis and nodal analysis (and their comparison)
Analysis using ideal sources
Application of fundamental electrical circuit theorems (e.g. complex numbers,
reactance, impedance, Kirchhoff’s laws, Norton and Thevenin’s theorems,
superposition)
AC and DC analysis similarities and differences.
AC circuit analysis:
Complex notation, polar and Cartesian coordinates, RLC circuits
Advanced use of phasor diagrams
Power: instantaneous power, power factor, apparent power, the power triangle
AC and DC power analysis similarities and differences
AC and DC power applications examples.
LO2 Apply appropriate methods to analyse and solve three-phase network
problems
Three-phase theory:
Theorems and theoretical aspects of three-phase networks
Application of trigonometric methods to solution of phasor diagrams
Application of complex numbers to represent quantities in AC circuits
Single-phase representation, and power flow analysis
Solution of balanced three-phase circuits
Analysis and comparison of delta and wye configurations
Complex notation applied to three-phase, unbalanced loads,
unconnected neutral point
Real power, reactive power, apparent power, power factor correction,
and efficiency for three-phase systems
Power measurements and calculations in AC and three-phase systems
Applications of three-phase systems.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
978
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO3 Examine analogue and digital circuits using appropriate laboratory and
simulation techniques
ECAD:
Use of computer modelling and simulation techniques to analyse and solve
electronic, electrical, and digital circuits, such as filters and amplifiers using
operational amplifiers and discrete devices; digital logic circuit elements;
and simple combination and sequential circuits
Health and safety policies, procedures and regulations, risk assessment and
mitigation, workplace considerations (i.e., devices and operating personnel)
Use of electrical and electronic instrumentation devices (e.g. multimeter, signal
generator, power supply, oscilloscope, etc.) to take measurements of various
circuits
Input/Output analysis for electronic, electrical, and digital circuits including
combinations of systems
DC-AC conversion with example practical applications.
LO4 Explain the characteristics of non-linear circuits to predict their behaviour
under a variety of conditions
Non-linear circuits:
Characteristics of linear and non-linear circuits (e.g. I-V relationships, component
behaviour, hysteresis, memory effects, etc.), mathematical modelling of a
number of semiconductor devices, including diodes, bipolar and Field Effect
Transistors and how this can be used to predict their ‘real’ behaviour in practice
Mathematically modelling the behaviour of semiconductor diodes,
bipolar transistors, and Field Effect Transistors
Non-linear behaviour of operational amplifiers.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
979
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Solve a range of electrical and electronic problems by
applying appropriate circuit theorems and mathematical
methods
P1 Solve electrical AC circuit M1 Analyse behaviour of AC D1 Analyse the
problems by applying the circuits in terms of electrical performance of AC circuits
appropriate theorems and power and performance. and their application, with
methods. justification of the theorems
and methods used,
including mathematical
methods and/or simulation.
LO2 Apply appropriate methods to analyse and solve three-
phase network problems
P2 Apply suitable theories and M2 Analyse how to D2 Critically analyse the
methods to solve three-phase synthesise three-phase performance of three-
network problems for a given systems in terms of phase circuits and their
industry context. electrical power, efficiency, application, with
and performance. justification of the methods
used.
LO3 Examine analogue and digital circuits using appropriate
laboratory and simulation techniques.
P3 Examine the performance M3 Analyse analogue and D3 Evaluate the operation
of analogue and digital circuits digital circuits behaviour of analogue and digital
by using the appropriate using the appropriate circuits by comparing their
laboratory and simulation laboratory and simulation predicted behaviour with
techniques. techniques. simulated, theoretical and
practical results.
LO4 Explain the characteristics of non-linear circuits to
predict their behaviour under a variety of conditions
P4 Explain the characteristics M4 Investigate a variety D4 Evaluate the application
of non-linear circuits and how of non-linear circuits of theory, simulation and
their behaviour differs in by calculating and/or practical investigation of a
practice with ‘ideal’ devices. simulating the effects of number of circuits, using
non-linear behaviour in a non-linear circuit theory.
number of differing circuits.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
980
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Bird J. (2013) Electrical Circuit Theory and Technology . Routledge.
Boylestad R.L. (2023) Introductory Circuit Analysis. Global Edition. 14th Ed. Pearson.
Boylestad R.L., and Nashelsky L. (2013) Digital fundamentals: A systems approach .
Pearson.
Fleckenstein J.E. (2020) Three-Phase Electrical Power . CRC Press.
Emery R.C. (2020) Digital Circuits: Logic and Design. 1st Ed. CRC Press.
Hambley A.R. (2018) Electrical Engineering: Principles and Applications . Global Edition.
7th Ed. Pearson.
Hughes E. et al. (2012) Electrical and Electronic Technology . Pearson.
Mohindru P. and Mohindru P. (2022) Electronic Circuit Analysis using LTSpice XVII
Simulator: A Practical Guide for Beginners . 1st Ed. CRC Press.
Rehg J.A. and Sartori G.J. (2005) Industrial Electronics . Prentice-Hall.
Robertson C.R. (2008) Fundamental Electrical and Electronic Principles . 3rd edition,
Newnes.
Wilamowski B.M. and Irwin J.D. (2011) The Industrial Electronic Handbook: Fundamentals
of Industrial Electronics . CRC Press.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
981
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
Advances in Electrical Engineering, Electronics and Energy
Electronic Letters
Electronics World Magazine
Everyday Practical Electronics Magazine
IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics
IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics
Industrial Economics Society
Journal of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
New Electronics Digital Magazine
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4019: Electrical and Electronic Principles
Unit 4020: Digital Principles.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
982
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025