Unit 5020: Utilisation of Electrical Power
Unit Code: K/651/0884
Level: 5
Credits: 15
Introduction
The supply, processing and usage of electrical energy is a leading preoccupation
around the world today, with significant technical, economic, environmental, and
societal implications. Engineers must engage seriously with this issue and need to be
aware of the real and practical impact of their decisions.
The aim of this unit is to develop students’ understanding of electrical power systems
and power distribution, giving consideration to the advantages and disadvantages of
alternative power sources.
Students will learn about the construction and characteristics of power transmission
and distribution systems, including the interconnections of systems and their
necessary protection. Students will also consider the economics of components,
power systems and alternative energy sources, in line with emerging developments
within the energy sector.
On successful completion of this unit students will be able to explain the demands,
sources and construction of electrical power generation and distribution systems,
review the interconnections of power systems and their necessary protection, identify
the requirement for engineering activity and describe new and emerging methods to
optimise energy usage.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
983
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Examine the demands, sources, construction of electrical power generation
and distribution systems
LO2 Explore the interconnections of power systems, their protection, the critical
processes, the effects of failure and the importance of electrical safety
LO3 Evaluate the effectiveness of forms of engineering activity to promote
sustainable development, with consideration of the economics of components,
power systems and alternative energy sources
LO4 Discuss new and emerging methods to optimise energy usage, conversion,
and storage techniques.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
984
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Examine the demands, sources, construction of electrical power generation
and distribution systems
Demands of a power generation and transmission system:
Total power demands of a country over a period of a working week, identifying
average, minimum and maximum demands
Overall annual energy consumption of domestic, industrial, transport and other
systems, identifying and quantifying energy losses
Extent of delivered energy that is in the form of electrical energy
Comparison between the demands of a G20 industrial economy with that of a
developing region economy; analysis of the trends of energy supply and demand
data to predict future energy requirements and budgets; contribution to the
energy supplied by each of the significant primary sources of energy of a defined
country. Influence of long-term governmental policy on managing the energy
budget; Discuss in groups the trends in electrical power generation and
distribution systems.
LO2 Explore the interconnections of power systems, their protection, the
critical processes, the effects of failure and the importance of electrical
safety
Construction of power generation and transmission systems:
Comparisons between the distribution of power using DC and single-phase and
polyphase AC transmission systems, amplitude and phase of voltages and
currents in three-phase systems with resistive and complex loads
Power factor and power measurement techniques of AC systems, including
identification of a range of loads and their respective power factors,
consequences of loads with poor power factor and the advantages of applying
power factor corrections; Calculation of power factor correction components
recognition of the effects of perturbations and harmonics within AC systems and
describing methods to measure and reduce harmonics; Protecting the power
distribution network from the effects of overload or damage, and identification
of the requirements of a robust protection system; Evaluation of the impedance
of an AC transmission line, its power losses and its effect on the power delivered
to a load
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
985
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Review safety procedures associated with power networks and techniques for
the safe measurement of system parameters
Analysis of a power network with multiple generators, transmission lines and
loads using power systems simulation software.
LO3 Evaluate the effectiveness of forms of engineering activity to promote
sustainable development, with consideration of the economics of
components, power systems and alternative energy sources
Sources of electrical energy:
Efficiency, costs, security, and environmental implications of energy production
using coal, oil and natural gas; Scope of ‘renewable’ in relation to sources of
energy
Evaluation of the efficiency, costs, security, and environmental implications
of energy production using renewable sources of mechanical kinetic energy,
including wave, tidal, large- and small-scale hydro and wind
Evaluate the efficiency, costs, security, and environmental implications of energy
production using solar heating, solar photovoltaics, biomass, fuel cells and
geothermal techniques. Current state of research into nuclear, fusion and fission
energy and other novel forms of energy.
LO4 Discuss new and emerging methods to optimise energy usage, conversion,
and storage techniques
Techniques for optimising electrical energy generation:
Techniques for optimising the generation of electricity in power stations and
small-scale generators by using varied and distributed generation systems and
managing the generation of power
Techniques for optimising energy usage and conversion:
Technologies and techniques for improving the efficiency or reducing the energy
consumption of equipment in common use, including lighting, heating, transport,
and industrial processes.
Energy storage techniques:
The need for energy storage techniques as part of an energy management
programme, short-term and long-term energy storage techniques and their
connection to the power grid, including, hydro, battery, super capacitor,
flywheel and thermal
Emerging battery technologies and battery management techniques.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
986
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Examine the demands, sources, construction of electrical
power generation and distribution systems
P1 Examine the key aspects M1 Apply reliable data to D1 Critically evaluate
of a country’s energy supply, quantify past and current government policies for
demand, and losses to create energy trends and predict managing energy budgets
a balanced energy budget for future trends, having first in the long term, making
the example. established the reliability justified recommendations.
of data from a variety of
sources.
LO2 Explore the interconnections of power systems, their
protection, the critical processes, the effects of failure and the
importance of electrical safety
P2 Explore the key aspects of M2 Analyse and interpret the D2 Critically evaluate the
three-phase power systems results of computer-based technologies for
using distributed generators simulations of power maintaining a high-quality
and loads and protection. networks. electrical supply to
customers, and
P3 Perform calculations and
demonstrate the
simulations on example
advantages of applying
systems, showing power
these by computer
losses and the advantages
simulation or otherwise.
of applying power factor
correction.
LO3 Evaluate the effectiveness of forms of engineering
activity to promote sustainable development, with
consideration of the economics of components, power
systems and alternative energy sources
P4 Evaluate the technology of M3 Critically evaluate the D3 Propose novel forms of
renewable sources of energy, application of renewable energy generation using
taking into account efficiency, energy sources to meet recently published
costs, security and existing demands, taking into research, taking into
environmental implications. account efficiency, costs, account efficiency, costs,
security and environmental security and environmental
implications. implications.
LO4 Discuss new and emerging methods to optimise energy
usage, conversion, and storage techniques
P5 Discuss representative M4 Evaluate the D4 Conceptualise novel
examples of existing and environmental effects of forms of energy
emerging methods of energy applying known energy optimisation and efficiency
optimisation. optimisation techniques. and their applications,
using recent research
publications.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
987
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Alassouli H.M. (2021) Lecture Notes of Generation of Electrical Power Course .
Alassouli H.M. (2018) Electrical Power Distribution: Lecture Notes for Electrical Power
Distribution Course − Softcover. Createspace Independent Publishing Platform
Meier A.V. (2006) Electric Power Systems: A Conceptual Introduction . 1st Ed.
John Wiley & Sons.
Glover J.D., Sarma M.S., and Overbye T.J. (2017) Power System Analysis and Design.
6th Ed. Cengage Learning.
Pabla A.S. (2014) Power System Engineering. 1st Ed. BS Publications.
Gonen T. (2007) Electric Power Transmission System Engineering: Analysis and Design .
2nd Ed. CRC Press.
Gonen T. (2020) Electric Power Distribution Engineering . 3rd Ed. CRC Press.
Mohan N. (2012) Electric Power Systems: A First Course. 1st Ed. John Wiley & Sons.
Grainger J. and Stevenson Jr. W.D. (1994) Power System Analysis. 1st Ed. McGraw-Hill.
Mohan N., Undeland T.M., and Robbins W.P. (2002) Power Electronics: Converters,
Applications, and Design. 3rd Ed. John Wiley & Sons.
Ram B. and Vishwakarma D.N. (2018) Power System Protection and Switchgear. 2nd Ed.
McGraw-Hill Education.
Del Toro V. (1992) Electric Machines and Power Systems: Volume I − Electric Machines .
1st Ed. Schaum’s Outline Series.
Cooper I. (Editor) (2022) Electrical Power Systems: Engineering Essentials (Hardback).
Murphy & Moore Publishing.
Gupta O.H., Sood V.K., and Malik O.P. (Editors) (2023 ) Recent Advances in Power Systems:
Select Proceedings of EPREC-2021 − Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering 812
(Paperback). Springer Verlag.
Silver M. (Editor) (2017) Electrical Power Transmission and Distribution (Hardback).
NY Research Press.
Taylor W.T. (2023) Electric Power Systems: A Practical Treatment of the Main Conditions,
Problems, Facts and Principles in the Installation and Operation of Modern Electric Power
Systems, for System Operators, General Electrical Engineers and Students (Hardback).
Legare Street Press.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
988
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
Electrical Power Systems Research
Energy Storage
Energy Storage Journal
Electric Power Components and Systems
Energy Procedia
IEEE Industry Applications Magazine
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics
IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics
International Journal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems
Sustainable Cities and Society
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 5008: Distributed Control Systems
Unit 5011: Industrial Power, Electronics and Storage.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
989
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025