Unit 5021: Further Control Systems
Engineering
Unit Code: M/651/0886
Level: 5
Credits: 15
Introduction
Control engineering is usually implemented at the top level of large projects,
determining the engineering system performance specifications, the required
interfaces, and hardware and software requirements. In most industries, stricter
requirements for product quality, energy efficiency, pollution level controls and the
general drive for improved performance, place tighter limits on control systems.
A reliable and high-performance control system depends a great deal upon accurate
measurements obtained from a range of transducers, mechanical, electrical, optical
and, in some cases, chemical. The information provided is often converted into digital
signals on which the control system acts to maintain optimum performance of the
process.
The aim of this unit is to provide the student with the further knowledge of the
principles of control systems and to advance understanding of how these principles
can be used to model and analyse simple control systems found in industry. The
study of control engineering is essential for most engineering disciplines, including
electrical, mechanical, chemical, aerospace, and manufacturing.
On successful completion of this unit students will be able to devise a typical three-
term controller for optimum performance, grasp several control techniques and how
these can be used to predict and control the behaviour of a range of engineering
processes in a practical way.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
990
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Explain concepts and contemporary applications of control systems
LO2 Analyse the elements of a high-level control system and its model development
LO3 Evaluate the structure and behaviour of high-level control systems
LO4 Examine the application of control parameters to produce optimum
performance of a control system.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
991
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Explain concepts and contemporary applications of control systems
Background, terminology, underpinning principles, and system basics:
Control system terminology and identification, including plant, process, system,
disturbances, inputs and outputs, initial time, additivity, homogeneity, linearity
and stability
Control systems properties and configurations, classification and performance
criteria of control systems
Block diagram representation of control systems and their relevance in industrial
application
Principles of Transfer Function (TF) for open and closed loop systems, use of
current computational tools for use in control systems (e.g., MATLAB, Simulink,
LabVIEW)
Latest methods of using data for control systems and applications − data
collection systems, data formats, documentation control processes and
procedures (e.g., location, access, authorisation)
Control systems and Industry 4.0 – relevance and impact on organisations.
LO2 Analyse the elements of a high-level control system and its model
development
Developing system applications:
Simple mathematical models of electrical, mechanical, and electro-mechanical
systems
Block diagram representation of simple control systems
Introduction of Laplace transform and its properties, simple first and second
order systems and their dynamic responses
Modelling and simulation of simple first and second order control system using
current computational tool (e.g., MATLAB, Simulink, LabVIEW).
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
992
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO3 Evaluate the structure and behaviour of high-level control systems
System behaviour:
Transient and steady behaviour of simple open loop and closed loop control
systems in response to a unit step input
Practical closed loop control systems and the effect of external disturbances
Poles and zeros and their role in the stability of control systems, steady-state
error. Applicability of Routh-Hurwitz stability criterion
Use of current computational tools (e.g., MATLAB, Simulink, LabVIEW) to model,
simulate and analyse the dynamic behaviour of simple open and closed loop
control systems.
LO4 Examine the application of control parameters to produce optimum
performance of a control system
Control parameters and optimum performance:
Introduction to the three-term PID controller, the role of a Proportional
controller (P), Integral controller (I) and the Derivative controller (D)
General block diagram representation and analysis, effects of each term,
P-I-D, control applied to first and second order systems
Simple closed loop analysis of the different combinations of the terms in PID
controllers, effect of the three terms on disturbance signals and an introduction
to simple PID controller tuning methods
Modelling and simulation using current computational tools (e.g., MATLAB,
Simulink, LabVIEW) to analyse the effects of each P-I-D term, individually and in
combination on a control system
Overview of developments and future applications of using AI in supporting
adaptive/self-learning control systems.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
993
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Explain concepts and contemporary applications of
control systems
P1 Explain a control system M1 Apply advanced modelling D1 Evaluate the
using block diagram techniques to develop the performance of a PID
representation and block diagram of a closed controller for position
simplifications. loop system for the position control of a DC motor.
control of DC motor using a
P2 Conceptualise a model of
PID controller.
an open and closed loop
control system using
simulation.
LO2 Analyse the elements of a high-level control system and
its model development
P3 Analyse the main building M2 Analyse Electrical, D2 Critically evaluate
blocks for high-level electrical Mechanical and Electro- complex electrical,
and mechanical control Mechanical control systems mechanical and
systems. using appropriate electromechanical
mathematical models control systems using
P4 Apply Laplace transforms
and simulation. mathematical models,
to mechanical or electrical
control engineering
control problems.
methods and simulation.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
994
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Pass Merit Distinction
LO3 Evaluate the structure and behaviour of high-level
control systems
P5 Analyse the behaviour M4 Use analytical techniques D3 Critically review the
and response of first and to analyse how the stability of performance of a second-
second order systems. a dynamic PID control system. order electromechanical
control system when
P6 Evaluate the external
subjected to external
effects on the stability of
disturbances.
PID control systems and the
techniques used to maintain
stability in these systems.
LO4 Examine the application of control parameters to
produce optimum performance of a control system
P7 Examine the role and
M5 Analyse dynamic D4 Evaluate the behaviour
implementation of the
responses of PID controllers of a second-order control
PID controllers in a simple
in terms of position control, system when PID terms are
electrical, mechanical, and/or tracking and disturbance changed individually and
electro-mechanical control rejection. in combination, using
systems. modelling and computer
simulation techniques.
P8 Synthesize the effects of
the P, I, and D parameters on
the dynamic responses of the
first and second order
systems.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
995
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Bolton W. (2021) Instrumentation and Control Systems . 3rd Ed. Elsevier.
Dabney J.B. and Harman T.L. (2003) Mastering Simulink . Prentice Hall.
Dorf R.C. and Bishop R.H. (2022) Modern Control Systems . 14th Ed. Pearson.
Essic J. (2018) Hands-On Introduction to LabVIEW for Scientists and Engineers .
4th Ed. Oxford University Press.
Iqbal K. (2020) A First Course in Control System Design. 2nd Ed. River Publishers.
Kondratenko Y.P, Kuntsevich V.M., Chikrii A.A. and Gubarev V.F. (2021)
Advanced Control Systems – Theory and Applications. 1st Ed. River Publishers.
Moore H. (2019) MATLAB for engineers. 5th Ed. Pearson.
Nagrath I.J. (2022) Control Systems Engineering. 7th Ed. New Age International
Publishers.
Nise N.S. (2011) Control Systems Engineering . 6th Ed. John Wiley & Sons.
Sarangapani J. and Xu H. (2021) Optimal Networked Control Systems with MATLAB.
CRC Press.
Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
Frontiers in Control Engineering
IEEE Open Journal of Control Systems
IFAC Journal of Systems and Control
Journal of Control Science and Engineering
Journal of Dynamic and Control Systems
Journal of Process Control.
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4016: Instrumentation and Control Systems
Unit 5008: Distributed Control Systems.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
996
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025