Unit 5022: Industrial Services
Unit Code: K/615/1525
Level: 5
Credits: 15
Introduction
Behind the scenes in many modern-day manufacturing facilities there lies a complex
system of services that powers production, both day and night. The underlying aim of
this unit is to enhance the students’ understanding of the electrical supply systems,
industrial air compressors, steam services, refrigeration systems and heat pumps
that are used in an array of industrial engineering environments.
This broad-based methodology reflects the fact that operations engineering
encompasses many disciplines and, as such, engineers must be conversant in the
wide scope of service provision. The intention is to encourage students to develop
a holistic approach to the design, operation, installation and maintenance of both
industrial services and operating equipment.
The student will be introduced to the fundamental principles of electrical power and
lighting systems, the rudiments of industrial compressed air systems, the provision
of steam for both power generation and process plant, and the applications and
precepts of refrigeration plant and heat pumps.
On successful completion of this unit students will be able to manage and maintain
a wide range of commonly encountered industrial systems.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
997
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Apply the operating principles of electrical power and lighting systems
LO2 Investigate the applications and efficiency of industrial compressors
LO3 Discuss provision of steam services for process and power use
LO4 Review industrial refrigeration and heat pump systems.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
998
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Apply the operating principles of electrical power and lighting systems
Electrical power:
Construction, starting and speed control of polyphase induction motors
Three-phase transformers: construction, clock number and group,
parallel operation
Electrical distribution: power system topologies, efficiency, power factor causes
and correction, effect on cost of supplies, circuit protection.
Lighting systems:
Lighting fundamentals: SI units, energy efficient circuit design and layout.
LO2 Investigate the applications and efficiency of industrial compressors
Industrial compressors:
Types and applications of industrial compressors
Role of intercoolers, dryers and air receivers
Efficiency and performance of air compressors
Hazards and faults: safety consideration and associated legislation.
LO3 Discuss the provision of steam services for process and power use
Steam power plant:
Use of tables and charts to analyse wet and dry saturated steam
Circuit diagrams showing steam raising plant
Process steam: enthalpy of evaporation, available energy
Overall plant efficiencies for process
Power steam: superheated steam, turbine efficiency, Rankine cycle,
cooling towers
Overall plant efficiency for power
Efficiencies and improvements.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
999
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO4 Review industrial refrigeration and heat pump systems.
Heat pumps and refrigeration:
Typical industrial heat pump and refrigeration systems
Application of the second law of thermodynamics
Reversed heat engines: reversed Carnot cycle
Vapour compression cycle
Refrigerant fluids: environmental impact
Refrigeration tables and charts (p-h diagrams)
Coefficient of performance for heat pumps and refrigerators.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
1000
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Apply the operating principles of electrical power and
lighting systems
P1 Illustrate the construction M1 Compare the economics D1 Analyse the approaches
and modes of connection of of single-phase and three- available for reducing
three-phase transformers. phase distribution, and electrical energy
assess the methods of speed consumption/costs in an
P2 Discuss the applications
control applied to polyphase industrial production facility.
and operating characteristics
induction motors.
of polyphase induction
motors.
P3 Apply the principles of
good lighting design to
produce a lighting scheme
for a given application.
LO2 Investigate the applications and efficiency of industrial
compressors
P4 Compare three types M2 Calculate the isothermal D2 Stating any assumptions,
of industrial compressor and polytropic work of a provide an explanatory
and identify justifiable reciprocating compressor derivation of the volumetric
applications for each. and thus deduce the efficiency formula for a
isothermal efficiency. reciprocating compressor.
P5 Review potential
Explain any discrepancies.
industrial compressor
faults and hazards.
P6 Determine the
performance characteristics
of an industrial compressor.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
1001
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Pass Merit Distinction
LO3 Discuss the provision of steam services for process and
power use
P7 Demonstrate the need M3 Illustrate why the D3 Evaluate the
for superheated steam in Rankine cycle is preferred modifications made to the
a power generating plant. over the Carnot cycle in basic steam raising systems
steam production plants to improve their overall
P8 Discuss the requirements
around the world. efficiency.
for process steam and
determine overall plant
efficiencies for steam
process and power systems.
LO4 Review industrial refrigeration and heat pump systems.
P9 Discuss the operating
M4 Assess the limiting D4 Conduct a cost-benefit
principles of both heat
factors that impact on the analysis on the installation of
pumps and industrial
economics of heat pumps. a ground source heat pump
refrigeration systems. on a smallholding. Present
M5 Discuss the apparent
your findings in the form
P10 Calculate COP, heating
contradiction between
of academic poster/
effect and refrigeration refrigeration cycles and
presentation.
effect of reversed heat the second law.
engines, making use of
refrigeration tables and
pressure/enthalpy charts.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
1002
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Anderson A. (2020) Wind Turbines: Theory and Practice . Cambridge University Press.
Cibse. (2002) Code for lighting . Butterworth-Heinemann.
Dunn, D. (2001) Fundamental Engineering Thermodynamics . Longman.
Eastop, T.D. and McConkey, A. (1996) Applied Thermodynamics for Engineering
Technologists . 5th Ed. Prentice Hall.
Hughes, A. (2013) Electric Motors and Drives: Fundamentals, Types and Applications.
4th Ed. Newnes.
Giampaolo T. (2024) Compressor Handbook: Principles and Practice. 2nd Ed. Routledge.
Rogers, G.F.C. and Mayhew, Y.R. (1994) Thermodynamic and Transport Properties of
Fluids: S. I. Units . 5th Ed. Wiley-Blackwell.
Melkebeek, J.A. (2018) Electrical Machines and Drives. Springer.
Websites
http://www.freestudy.co.uk/ Free Study
(Tutorials)
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4013: Fundamentals of Thermodynamics and Heat Engines
Unit 5005: Further Thermodynamics
Unit 5023: Thermofluids.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
1003
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025