Unit 5023: Thermofluids
Unit Code: R/651/0887
Level: 5
Credits: 15
Introduction
In everyday life, you are never too far away from some system or device that relies on
both fluid mechanics and thermodynamics. From the water circulating in your home
central heating radiators to the hydraulic door closer to the back of a fire door, the
presence of thermofluids is constantly around us.
This unit aims to provide a rational understanding of functional thermodynamics and
fluid mechanics in common industrial applications. The unit promotes a problem-
based approach to solving realistic work-related quandaries such as steam plant
efficiency and fluid flow capacities, and complements other units such as Units 4011,
4013, and 5005 .
Students will examine fundamental thermodynamic principles, steam and gas turbine
systems, and viscosity in fluids, along with static and dynamic fluid systems. Each
element of the unit will identify a variety of engineering challenges and assess how
problems are overcome in real-life industrial situations.
Students will develop their perceptions of industrial thermodynamic systems,
particularly those involving steam and gas turbine power. In addition, they will
consider the impact of energy transfer in engineering applications along with the
characteristics of fluid flow in piping systems and numerous hydraulic devices,
all of which are prevalent in typical manufacturing and process facilities.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
1004
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Evaluate industrial thermodynamic systems and their properties
LO2 Examine the operation of practical steam and gas turbine plants
LO3 Illustrate the effects of viscosity in fluids
LO4 Analyse fluid systems and hydraulic machines.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
1005
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Evaluate industrial thermodynamic systems and their properties
Thermodynamic systems:
Power generation plant
Application of the first law of thermodynamics
Analysis of Non-Flow Energy Equation (NFEE) and Steady Flow Energy Equation
(SFEE) systems
Application of thermodynamic property tables
Energy transfer systems employing polytropic processes (isothermal, adiabatic,
and isentropic)
Pressure/volume diagrams and the concept of work done: use of conventions
The application of the Gas Laws and polytropic laws for vapours and gases
Heat transfer theory and fundamentals
One-dimensional conduction and thermal resistance
Application of problem-solving tools in the context of thermodynamic system
investigations e.g. root cause analysis (RCA), process failure modes effects
analysis (PFMEA), fishbone, practical problem solving (PPS), advanced product
quality planning (APQP)
Health and safety within the context, including risk awareness and compliance.
LO2 Examine the operation of practical steam and gas turbine plants
Steam and gas turbine plant:
Second Law of Thermodynamics and entropy
Heat Engine, Heat pump, and Carnot cycle
Entropy property and T-s diagram
Principles of operation of steam and gas turbine plants
Use of property diagrams to analyse plant
Characteristics of steam/gas turbine plant as used in energy supply
Energy-saving options adopted on steam plants operating on modified
Rankine cycle
Performance characteristics of steam and gas power plant
Cycle efficiencies: turbine isentropic efficiencies and overall relative efficiency
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
1006
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Use of various problem-solving tools in the context of steam and gas turbine
plants, with industry scenarios and real-world case studies.
LO3 Illustrate the effects of viscosity in fluids
Viscosity in fluids:
Viscosity: shear stress, shear rate, dynamic viscosity, kinematic viscosity
Viscosity measurement: operating principles of viscosity measuring devices e.g.,
falling sphere, U-tube, rotational and orifice viscometers (such as Redwood)
Newtonian fluids and non-Newtonian fluids: pseudoplastic, Bingham plastic,
Casson plastic, and dilatant fluids
Latest trends and applications of viscous fluids.
LO4 Analyse fluid systems and hydraulic machines
Fluid systems:
Characteristics of fluid flow: laminar and turbulent flow, Reynolds number
Friction factors: relative roughness of pipe, use of Moody diagrams
Head losses across various industrial pipe fittings and valves, use of Bernoulli’s
Equation and Darcy’s Formula
External incompressible flow and boundary layer
Boundary layer development on a flat surface
Separation and Wake
Aerodynamic forces: lift and drag
Hydraulic machines:
Turbines: Pelton wheel, Kaplan turbine, Francis wheel
Pumps: centrifugal, reciprocating.
Analysis of systems:
Dimensional analysis: verification of equations for torque, power, and flow rate
Application of dimensional analysis to determine the characteristics of a scale
model
Use of Buckingham Pi Theorem
Discussion of dimensionless numbers: Reynold, Mach, Froude, Prandtl,
and Nusselt numbers.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
1007
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Evaluate industrial thermodynamic systems and their
properties
P1 Evaluate the operation of M1 Analyse the rate of heat D1 Critically evaluate
industrial thermodynamic transfer through a composite thermodynamic processes
systems and their wall. by using non-flow energy
properties. equation (NFEE) or steady
flow energy equation
P2 Describe the application
(SFEE) systems with
of the first law of
thermodynamic property
thermodynamics to
tables.
industrial systems.
P3 Apply first law analysis
for a process of ideal gas.
LO2 Examine the operation of practical steam and gas
turbine plants
P4 Examine the principles of M2 Justify why the Rankine D2 Evaluate the
operation of steam turbine cycle is preferred over the modifications made to the
plant. Carnot cycle in steam basic Rankine cycle to
production plants around improve the overall
P5 Calculate overall steam
the world. efficiency of steam
turbine plant efficiencies
power plants.
by the use of charts
and/or tables.
P6 Discuss the principles of
operation of gas turbine
plants.
LO3 Illustrate the effects of viscosity in fluids
P7 Illustrate the properties M3 Evaluate the effects of D3 Compare the results
of viscosity in fluids. shear force on Newtonian of a viscosity test on a
and non-Newtonian fluids. Newtonian fluid with those
P8 Explore three viscosity
given on a data sheet and
measurement techniques.
explain any discrepancies.
LO4 Analyse fluid systems and hydraulic machines
P9 Analyse the M4 Review the significance D4 Evaluate the use of
characteristics of fluid flow of the Reynolds number on dimensionless analysis using
in industrial piping systems. fluid flow in a given system. the Buckingham Pi Theorem
for a given industrial
P10 Discuss the operational
application.
aspects of hydraulic
machines.
P11 Apply dimensional
analysis to fluid flow.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
1008
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Baskharone E. A. (2012) Thermal Science: Essentials of Thermodynamics, Fluid Mechanics,
and Heat Transfer . McGraw Hill.
Bejan A. (2016) Advanced Engineering Thermodynamics. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Borgnakke C. and Sonntag R. (2022) Fundamental of Thermodynamics. 10h Ed. Wiley
Cengel Y. (2020) Heat and Mass Transfer: Fundamentals and Applications . 6th Ed.
McGraw Hill.
Cengel Y. (2019) Thermodynamics: An Engineering Approach Si . 9th Ed. McGraw Hill.
Cengel Y.A. and Cimbala J.M. (2013) Fluid Mechanics Fundamentals and Applications
(Mechanical Engineering) Hardcover. McGraw-Hill.
Massey B.S. and Ward-Smith J. (2011) Mechanics of Fluids. 9th Ed. Oxford: Spon Press.
Revankar S., Sen S. and Sahu D. (Editors) (2021) Proceedings of International Conference
on Thermofluids KIIT Thermo 2020 . Springer.
Trachenko K. (2023) Theory of Liquids: From Excitations to Thermodynamics (Hardback).
Cambridge University Press.
White F. and Xu H. (2021) Fluid Mechanics. 9th Ed McGraw Hill.
Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics
Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science
International Journal of Thermofluids
International Journal of Thermofluid Science and Technology
ISME Journal of Thermofluids
Journal of Fluid Mechanics
International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow
Journal of Fluids Engineering
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
1009
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4011: Fluid Mechanics
Unit 4013: Fundamentals of Thermodynamics and Heat Engines
Unit 4024: Electro, Pneumatic and Hydraulic Systems
Unit 5005: Further Thermodynamics.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
1010
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025