Unit 5041: Engineering Project
Unit Code: M/650/2948
Level: 5
Credits: 15
Introduction
The work of the professional engineer very often consists of the specification,
development, management and delivery of projects. It is essential that students
following the path of becoming a professional engineer have a thorough grounding
in all aspects of this important process.
This unit will guide the student through the design, testing and evaluation of a project
within their specialist area. The processes of documenting, managing and presenting
the outcomes of the project will form part of the work, as will the selection and use of
commercially available management, simulation and presentation development tools.
Risk assessment, quality and cost issues, final analysis of outcomes, and the drawing
of appropriate conclusions will also be covered. A final presentation will develop
communication skills and include personal evaluation and reflection.
On successful completion of this unit, the student will have the skills and knowledge
to initiate, manage, complete and evaluate complex engineering projects on-time and
within budget.
Note to centre: This is essentially a practical unit with the completed project and all
the attendant processes forming the assessed work; it is not expected that further
work for assessment will be necessary. The Project Supervisor should guide students
to ensure that the chosen project has enough scope to be sufficiently complex, such
that the outcomes are at Level 5.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
1151
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit, a student will be able to:
LO1 Propose an engineering-based project in line with national and international
engineering regulatory and ethical frameworks
LO2 Create an engineering-based project using project management software,
tools and techniques
LO3 Implement a project plan to include the production of a technical engineering
report
LO4 Present the engineering-based project and reflect on the project outcomes.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
1152
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Propose an engineering-based project in line with national and
international engineering regulatory and ethical frameworks
Selection of a suitable project:
Shortlisting of suitable projects based on considerations of cost, likely
completion constraints and user needs
Identification of the nature of the problems under consideration through
primary and secondary research methods, using digital and non-digital sources
and relevant technical, engineering, industry, regulatory, legislative and ethical
standards and risk factors
Feasibility study to identify constraints; scoping by defining objectives, purpose
and deliverables; production of outline briefs; Feasibility study to identify
constraints; scoping by defining objectives, purpose and deliverables; production
of outline briefs; consideration of project related responsibilities at various
levels including secure operations and application of appropriate processes,
policies and legislation in the context of business goals, vision and values;
tools/techniques for upgrading and maintaining systems within the project
scope; resilience in undertaking project tasks and work securely within the
business.
Health and safety policies, procedures and regulations, compliance,
risk assessment processes and procedures.
Selection criteria and process:
Development of selection criteria (e.g. time constraints, risk evaluation,
cost, skills set, availability of materials, meeting the user needs)
Selection and justification process – final selection.
Project aims:
Description of engineering-based project intentions and achievements,
(e.g. design, test, construct, replicate, question existing)
Refinement of aims to clearly define the purpose of the engineering-based
project
Development of specific aims that are clear, concise and provide a logical flow
between each aim to establish an engineering-based project as a coherent
whole.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
1153
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Project objectives:
Goals or steps to achieve engineering-based project aims (e.g. specific,
measurable, achievable, realistic, time-constrained (SMART)).
Difference between project aims and objectives:
Aims – describe what is hoped to be achieved
Objectives – detail how project aims are to be achieved.
Project proposal development:
Outline/summary of project (e.g. the problem the project intends to solve, the
solution the project provides to the problem, the impact the project will have)
Project background (e.g. what is already known about the problem, primary and
secondary research undertaken/literature review)
Project approach (e.g. project schedule (including important milestones), project
team roles and responsibilities, risk mitigation, project deliverables, reporting
tools)
Defining project deliverables (e.g. end product or final objective, project timeline,
SMART goals that align with deliverables)
Resources (e.g. budget, cost breakdown, resource allocation plan)
Conclusion (e.g. summary of problem and solution, project impact).
LO2 Create an engineering-based project using project management software,
tools and techniques
Project management software, tools, methodologies and techniques:
Review commercially available project management tools/software to select
most suitable; consideration of requirements of the chosen project, difference
between systems (e.g. Prince 2) and software (e.g. PMIS, Microsoft Project,
PROMIST); task and tracking tools and techniques (e.g. Trello, Smartsheet, Excel);
scheduling and time planning (Gantt chart or similar); network diagrams, types
and applications; critical-path methods (PERT); budget management tools
Methodologies (e.g. waterfall, Agile, Scrum, Kanban, Scrumban, eXtreme
programming (XP), Adaptive Project Framework (APF), Lean)
Project management techniques (e.g. SWOT, stakeholder matrices, risk mapping,
radar chart and summary risk profiles).
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
1154
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Selection and application:
Justification of selection by criteria, level of detail and usability, flexibility
considerations and constraints; pre-population of planning tools and updating
regime; evaluation and summary of usability on project completion.
Production of project plan:
Production of final project plan with clear lifecycle considerations (e.g. initiation,
planning, execution, closure, review and reflection), roles and responsibilities,
timeline goals (using Gantt chart or similar), budget management (if applicable),
project evaluation criteria (e.g. decision matrix, Health, Environment & Safety
(HES) decision matrix, analytic hierarchy process (AHP), cost-effectiveness,
organisation-based information architecture (OBIA), meeting the user needs)
Key performance indicators (KPIs)
Other project planning and management considerations: change management,
compliance in delivering outputs, responsible planning and work prioritisation,
focus on products/processes that are accessible, inclusive and diverse; predictive
maintenance, route-cause analysis and effective problem solving, individual and
team approaches to solving problems and risk management); commitment to
upskilling/reskilling (e.g. digital competencies, sustainability), and continued
professional development.
LO3 Implement the project plan to include the production of a technical
engineering report
Project execution phase:
Conduct or simulate planned project activities to generate outcomes which
provide a solution to the identified engineering problem
Review a range of practical examples to solve potential structural or
performance-based issues using simulation software or experimental
approaches
Continuous monitoring of project development against agreed project plan,
adapting plan where necessary – specification and justification of changes
Effective use of work plan and time management using chosen packages;
assessing effectiveness and useability of monitoring package(s); tracking costs
and timescales for spending; modification of risk assessment as project
progresses
Maintaining a project diary to monitor progress against milestones and
timescales, including self-reflection on skills and personal development.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
1155
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Project report:
Possible report formats, logical presentation of work, use of evaluation
techniques, critique of data/findings/analysis, presentation of final outcome in
terms of original project brief, explanation of cost/time overruns; avoidance of
generalisations
Drafting and reviewing work; adherence to international, national, Engineering
Council and ethical standards
Recommendations for further work, limitations of chosen process, possible areas
for improvement; reflection on process, selected software/process effectiveness;
personal reflection – strengths and areas for development to attain sustainable
high-performance levels.
Termination of project:
Cost performance analysis, audit tails, comparison of project outcomes against
planned objectives, qualitative and quantitative analysis of process and
outcomes; close-out reports
Preparation of data and analysis for summary presentation
Process of self-reflection on project and personal performance.
LO4 Present the engineering-based project and reflection of the project
outcomes.
Presentation:
Selection of presentation format, audience expectations and contributions, who
to invite; what to include in presentation, logical presentation, avoiding ‘busy’
slides and assumptions, time allocation, summaries and project evaluation,
handling question and answer (Q&A) sessions; inclusion of reflective practice.
Reflective practice:
Reflection on the activities and experiences (e.g. lessons learnt, teamwork,
safety awareness, self-organisation, managing people, sustainability, technical
expertise, communication skills, challenges, difficulties, strengths/weaknesses,
own work practices, identification of areas to improve)
Tools (e.g. strengths/weaknesses/opportunities/threats (SWOT) analysis, 5R
(reporting, responding, relating, reasoning & reconstructing) framework for
reflection, Kolb’s reflective cycle, Driscoll’s model of reflection, Gibbs’ reflective
cycle, Schon).
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
1156
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Feedback:
Noting audience/third-party feedback and action plan to address issues;
completion and closure of project reflective log; refining future professional
practice and building further resilience within the project teams.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
1157
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Propose an engineering-based project in line with
national and international engineering regulatory and
ethical frameworks
P1 Propose an engineering- M1 Undertake a feasibility D1 Illustrate the effects of
based project brief in study to justify engineering- relevant current legislation,
line with national and based project proposal. ethics and risk in developing
international engineering an engineering-based
regulatory and ethical project proposal.
frameworks
P2 Develop engineering-
based project proposal aims
and objectives.
LO2 Create an engineering-based project using project
management software, tools and techniques
P3 Create a project plan
M2 Make full use of project D2 Make full use of project
using project management
management software to management software to
software, tools and
develop a comprehensive develop a comprehensive
techniques. project plan. project plan with evaluation
criteria.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
1158
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Pass Merit Distinction
LO3 Implement the project plan to include the production
of a technical engineering report
P4 Implement required M3 Implement a full D3 Critically analyse the
project activities, recording range of project activities, project outcomes in the
progress against original recording progress against project report against the
project plan. original project plan. original project plan, making
justified recommendations
P5 Produce a coherent M4 Produce a structured
for further improvements.
technical engineering and detailed technical
project report covering engineering project report
each stage of the project. covering each stage of
the project that includes
P6 Conduct or simulate
justified project outcomes.
planned project activities to
generate outcomes which M5 Review a range of
provide a solution to the practical examples to solve
identified engineering potential structural or
problem. performance-based issues
using simulation software or
experimental approaches.
LO4 Present the engineering-based project and reflection
of the project outcomes.
P7 Present the engineering- M6 Evaluate the end-to-end D4 Critically evaluate the
based project using delivery of the engineering- end-to-end delivery of the
appropriate media to a based project in terms of engineering-based project in
technically literate audience, own performance and how terms of reflective practice
and conduct a feedback third-party feedback might and produce an action plan
session. be addressed. and recommendations for
how third-party feedback
P8 Reflect on project
might be addressed.
outcomes.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
1159
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Blokdyk G. (2022) Engineering Project Manager Critical Questions Skills Assessment
(Paperback).
Desai A. (2022) Engineering Project Management: A Quantitative Approach
(Paperback). Cognella, Inc.
Malheiro B. and Fuentes-Durá P. (Editors) (2022) Analyzing the European Project
Semester to Improve Engineering Education − e-Book Collection. IGI Global.
Ma Y. and Rong Y. (2021) Senior Design Projects in Mechanical Engineering:
A Guidebook for Teaching and Learning (Hardback). Springer Nature Switzerland AG.
Newton R. (2016) Project Management Step by Step . 2nd Ed. Pearson Education.
Siegel N.G. (2019) Engineering Project Management. Wiley.
Striebig B., Ogundipe A. and papadakis M. (2015) Engineering Applications in Sustainable
Design and Development (S.I. Edition). Cengage Learning.
Oberlender G.D. (2014) Project Management for Engineering and Construction . 3rd Ed.
McGraw-Hill Education.
Qiu M., Qiu H., and Zeng Y. (2022) Research and Technical Writing for Science and
Engineering . CRC Press.
Thiel D.V. (2014) Research Methods for Engineers. Cambridge University Press.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
1160
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
American Journal of Engineering Research
Arabian Journal for Science & Engineering
Scientific Reports
Engineering Reports
Science Progress
Cell Reports Physical Science
Engineering Research Express
European Journal of Engineering and Technology Research
IETE journal of research
Indian Journal of Engineering
International Journal of Indian Research
International Journal of Engineering Research in Africa
International Journal of Engineering Research & Technology
International Journal of Project Management
Journal of Engineering in Industrial Research
Journal of Engineering Research
Journal of Engineering Research and Sciences (JENRS)
Journal of Engineering Research and Reports
London Journal of Engineering Research
The Journal of Engineering Research [TJER] .
Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4004: Managing a Professional Engineering Project
Unit 4031: Introduction to Professional Engineering Management
Unit 4062: Professional Engineering Practice
Unit 5001: Research Project
Unit 5002: Professional Engineering Management.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
1161
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025