Unit 5051: Heating, Ventilation and Air
Conditioning (HVAC)
Unit code H/615/1524
Unit level 5
Credit value 15
Introduction
The buildings we use in everyday life to live, work, study and socialise are becoming
increasingly more complex in their design. As well as being subject to more stringent
environmental emission targets, within these buildings the heating, ventilation and
air conditioning (HVAC) systems play a vital role in maintaining the comfort of the
occupants within the built environment.
This unit will introduce students to some of the most important HVAC systems and
their supporting elements, and the underpinning science that is currently used in
many different buildings around the world.
Subjects covered include: ventilation rates, systems, legislation, strategies and
associated equipment. Also explored are topics such as air conditioning systems,
cooling loads, psychrometric principles and processes, heating systems, fuels,
combustion processes, boiler efficiency calculations and Building Management
Systems (BMS).
On successful completion of this unit students will be able to explain the fundamental
principles of HVAC systems and discuss the operational advantages of using BMS for
maintaining the careful balance between ergonomic climate control and maximum
economic efficiency.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
1233
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Explain the operating principles of non-domestic ventilation systems
LO2 Explore the range of air conditioning systems
LO3 Investigate the operational characteristics of non-domestic heating systems
LO4 Describe the role Building Management Systems (BMS) have in controlling and
monitoring HVAC systems.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
1234
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Explain the operating principles of non-domestic ventilation systems
Ventilation systems:
Ventilation requirements: approved documents, requirements for occupants
or processes
Ventilation strategies: local or centralised systems, natural ventilation,
extract only, supply only and balanced systems
Ventilation system components and typical system layouts.
Ventilation rates:
Calculation of ventilation rates, supply for occupants or processes,
supply to achieve required room air change rate
Mass and volumetric flow rates to maintain design room conditions.
Fans:
Fan types and operational characteristics
Fan selection and Fan Laws.
LO2 Explore the range of air conditioning systems
Air conditioning systems:
Air conditioning requirements: requirement for comfort cooling or close control
Air conditioning strategies: types of air conditioning plant.
Cooling loads:
Estimation of heat gains and cooling loads
Factors affecting the cooling load requirements, building/room use, shading,
building construction and orientation, internal heat gains.
Psychrometrics:
Psychrometric principles: psychrometric terms and properties
Plotting psychrometric processes using charts
Use of psychrometric charts to determine cooling coil, heater battery,
frost coil and humidifier duties.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
1235
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO3 Investigate the operational characteristics of non-domestic heating
systems
Heating systems:
Heating requirements: approved documents, occupant’s comfort
Heat loss calculations: heat losses though a structure, U values and there use in
calculating heating load requirements
Heating strategies: local or centralised systems
Heating system components and typical system layouts.
Fuels:
Properties and characteristics of common solid, liquid and gaseous fuels.
Combustion:
Combustion principles
Products of complete and incomplete combustion and their implications
Minimum air requirements for stoichiometric combustion
Causes of incomplete combustion.
Boiler efficiency:
Boiler efficiency calculations.
LO4 Describe the role Building Management Systems (BMS) have in controlling
and monitoring HVAC systems.
Requirement of the BMS:
Client/end user requirements and operational needs, energy efficiency concerns.
Function of a BMS:
Systems controlled by BMS: heating, lighting, ventilation, air conditioning,
security/access
Energy monitoring and reporting.
BMS hardware:
Types of BMS hardware available, advantages and disadvantages,
performance and cost. Controlling software, remote access and control.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
1236
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Explain the operating principles of non-domestic
ventilation systems LO1 and LO2
P1 Explain and compare M1 Discuss the types of D1 Evaluate and compare a
two alternative ventilation fans used in non-domestic number of passive and active
strategies for a non- ventilation systems methods used to help cool
domestic building and and analyse their buildings giving suitable
recommend the most characteristics. examples.
suitable.
P2 Using the information
from P1, calculate the
ventilation requirements
for the rooms in a non-
domestic building.
LO2 Explore the range of air conditioning systems
P3 Explain the requirement
M2 Analyse the factors
for air conditioning in a
affecting the cooling loads
variety of non-domestic
in buildings.
buildings.
P4 Estimate the cooling load
requirements for rooms in
non-domestic buildings
using a recognised ‘rule
of thumb’ method.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
1237
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Pass Merit Distinction
LO3 Investigate the operational characteristics of
non-domestic heating systems LO3 and LO4
P5 Explain and compare M3 Discuss the combustion D2 Calculate the minimum
two alternative heating properties of common fuels air requirements for a given
strategies for a non- used in non-domestic fuel and distinguish between
domestic building and heating systems. complete and incomplete
recommend the most combustion, predicting the
suitable. possible consequences of
incomplete combustion.
P6 Estimate the heating load
requirements for rooms in
non-domestic buildings
using a recognised ‘rule of
thumb’ method.
LO4 Describe the role Building Management Systems
(BMS) have in controlling and monitoring HVAC systems.
P7 Describe the M4 Evaluate the
requirements of a building advantages of a building
management system in fitted with a full Building
non-domestic buildings. Management System.
P8 Describe the functions
performed by a building
management system in a
non-domestic building.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
1238
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Chadderton, D. (2013) Building Services Engineering . 6th Ed. Abingdon: Routledge.
Cibse (2016) Guide B: Heating, Ventilating, Air Conditioning and Refrigeration . London.
Cibse (2016) Guide F: Energy Efficiency in Buildings . London.
Cibse. (2009) CIBSE Guide H: Building control systems . CIBSE, London.
Hall F. and GREENO R. (2023) Building Services Handbook . 10th Ed. Routledge.
Porges F. (2020) HVAC Engineer’s Handbook .11th Ed. Blackwells.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
1239
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025