Unit 4005: Renewable Energy
Unit Code: R/651/0714
Level: 4
Credits: 15
Introduction
With the increasing concerns regarding climate change arising from increasing carbon
dioxide levels and other adverse environmental impacts of industrial processes, there
are widespread economic, ethical, legislative and social pressures on engineers to
develop technologies and processes that have reduced carbon and environmental
impact.
This unit aims to familiarise students with both established and emerging renewable
energy resources and technologies. It will delve into current and future storage and
generation systems, critically exploring their capabilities and constraints.
On successful completion of this unit, students will be able to determine the optimum
combination of renewable energy technologies and evaluate their efficiencies,
describe how to conduct a cost–benefit analysis to determine the most viable option
between renewable and conventional energy sources, and consider the relevant
political, socio-economic, and legal factors that influence the selection of appropriate
energy technologies.
Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Explore potential renewable energy resources and technologies
LO2 Determine the optimum combination and efficiencies of renewable energy
technologies for a particular location
LO3 Conduct a cost-benefit analysis to determine the most viable option between
renewable and conventional energy sources
LO4 Analyse the socio-economic, legislative, and environmental factors in selecting
appropriate renewable energy technologies.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
43
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Explore potential renewable energy resources and technologies
Alternative energy resources, their respective merits, and drawbacks:
Wind energy, ocean and tidal energy, biomass, geothermal energy, hydropower,
solar photovoltaic, solar thermal energy, and waste-to-energy.
Energy storage and generation technologies (e.g., batteries, hydrogen).
LO2 Determine the optimum combination and efficiencies of renewable energy
technologies for a particular location
Energy demand and security of supply:
Energy consumption changes, intensity and trends (domestic, industrial,
transport, and services sectors)
Factors affecting changes in energy consumption and demand
Future demand planning based on trends and needs analysis
Risk analysis for energy supplies for local areas and global regions
Energy capacity margins analysis related to changes in demand
Alternatives for locally used energy sources.
Energy reduction and efficiency approaches:
Energy systems available for a given location
Energy legislation and standards
Energy saving and reduction schemes, energy saving technologies available
Energy efficiency approaches for domestic energy use
Grants and government schemes, and the effects of such schemes on supply
and demand.
Grid Integration Requirements:
Local Grid Code requirements and compliance for integration of the renewable
energy assets
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
44
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO3 Conduct a cost-benefit analysis to determine the most viable option
between renewable and conventional energy sources
Financial and environmental implications:
Cost-benefit analysis using appropriate tools and techniques
Socio-economic factors
Financial implications of renewable and conventional energy.
LO4 Analyse the socio-economic, legislative, and environmental factors in
selecting appropriate renewable energy technologies.
Set-up and operation of renewable technologies:
Socio-economic factors (e.g. UN sustainability goals)
Legislative and commercial considerations, including carbon taxes and national
and international climate change legislation
Environmental factors
Evaluation planning tools such as PESTLE analysis
Local environmental impact and considerations
Waste impact, waste management strategies
Contamination issues and society wellbeing.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
45
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Explore potential renewable energy resources and
technologies
P1 Explore potential M1 Analyse storage D1 Evaluate a wide variety of
renewable energy resources technologies and their renewable energy resources,
suitable for your local area advantages and with innovative insights into
and their working principles disadvantages in relation to their potential future usage.
with the aid of diagrams. at least three different forms
of renewable energy.
LO2 Determine the optimum combination and efficiencies
of renewable energy technologies for a particular location
P2 Determine the most M2 Analyse the location’s D2 Propose an innovative,
efficient combination of specific environmental and well-justified combination
renewable energy geographical factors and of renewable energy
technologies for a specified how they relate to the technologies for the specific
location. efficiency of different location, taking into account
renewable energy not only efficiency but also
technologies. factors such as sustainability,
cost-effectiveness and
societal impact.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
46
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Pass Merit Distinction
LO3 Conduct a cost-benefit analysis to determine the most
viable option between renewable and conventional energy
sources
P3 Conduct cost-benefit M3 Effectively incorporate D3 Present a thorough
analysis that considers the indirect costs and benefits and nuanced cost–benefit
direct costs and benefits such as environmental analysis that considers both
of both renewable and impacts and potential short-term and long-term
conventional energy societal benefits and impacts, as well as
sources. drawbacks into the contingencies and
cost-benefit analysis. uncertainties, with a well-
argued recommendation
based on the analysis.
LO4 Analyse the socio-economic, legislative, and
environmental factors in selecting appropriate renewable
energy technologies.
P4 Analyse how socio- M4 Provide a detailed D4 Evaluate the impact of
economic, legislative, and analysis of specific socio- socio-economic, legislative
environmental factors economic, legislative, and and environmental factors
influence the selection of environmental factors and on selecting renewable
appropriate renewable their impact on selecting energy technologies, using
energy technologies, for renewable energy relevant, real-world
a given local context. technologies in a examples and forecasting
global context. potential future trends.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
47
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Andrews, J. and Jelley, N. (2013) Energy Science: Principles, Technologies and Impacts .
2nd Ed. Oxford University Press.
Boyle G. (2012). Renewable Energy: Power for a Sustainable Future. 4th Ed. Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press.
Kolhe M.L. (Editor) (2022) Renewable Energy Systems in Smart Grid: Select Proceedings of
International Conference on Renewable and Clean Energy (ICRCE) 2022 − Lecture Notes in
Electrical Engineering 938 (Paperback). Springer Verlag.
Kularatna N. (2020) Energy Storage Devices for Renewable Energy. Elsevier .
Manwell J.F., McGowan J.G., and Rogers A.L. (2009) Wind Energy Explained:
Theory, Design and Application. 2nd Ed. Wiley.
McCartney D. (Editor) (2023) Renewable Energy Sources: Engineering and Technology
(Hardback). States Academic Press.
Moore E.A. (2022) Explaining Renewable Energy (Paperback). Taylor & Francis Ltd.
Nahhas A.M.A. and Ibhadode A.O.A. (Editors) (2023) Renewable Energy: Recent Advances
(Hardback). IntechOpen.
Nelson V.C. (2011). Introduction to Renewable Energy. 2nd Ed. CRC Press.
Olabi A.G.(Editor) (2023) Renewable Energy − Volume 2: Wave, Geothermal, and
Bioenergy: Definitions, Developments, Applications, Case Studies, and Modelling and
Simulation (Paperback). Elsevier.
Shere J. (2013) Renewable: The World-Changing Power of Alternative Energy.
St. Martin’s Griffin.
Smets A. Jäger K., Isabella O., Swaaij R.V., and Zeman M. (2016) Solar Energy:
The Physics and Engineering of Photovoltaic Conversion, Technologies and Systems.
UIT Cambridge Ltd.
Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
Renewable Energy Focus Journal
Journal of Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Renewable and Sustainable Energy: An International Journal
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
48
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4004: Managing a Professional Engineering Project
Unit 4089 Net Zero Energy Technologies I: Systems and Demand
Unit 5011: Industrial Power, Electronics and Storage
Unit 5018: Sustainability
Unit 5054: Net Zero Energy Technologies II: Infrastructure and Pathways.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
49
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025