Unit 4007: Machining and Processing of
Engineering Materials
Unit Code: D/651/0718
Level: 4
Credits: 15
Introduction
Practical articles that we see and use every day such as automobiles, aircraft, trains,
and even the cans we use to store our food, came from the ideas and visions of
engineers and designers. The production of these articles is based on well-established
production processes, machines, and materials.
The aim of this unit is to introduce students to the application of a variety of material
forming processes involved in the production of components and articles for everyday
use. Among the topics included in this unit are: conventional machining, additive layer
manufacturing (ALM), shaping and moulding processes used in the production of
components, machine tooling, jigs and fixtures required to support the manufacture
of components, using metallic and non-metallic materials such as polymers and
composites.
On successful completion of this unit students will be able to describe moulding,
shaping, and forging, ALM manufacturing processes, explain the importance of
material selection, and summarise the impact machining processes have on the
physical properties of a component.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
57
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit students will be able to:
LO1 Explore the conventional machining, additive manufacture and forming
processes and their application in the production of engineered components
LO2 Explain how component materials, metals and non-metals, affect the selection
of the most appropriate machining or forming process
LO3 Examine the most appropriate machine tooling, jigs and fixtures to support the
production of an engineered component
LO4 Discuss the most appropriate moulding and shaping process used to produce
a range of metal and non-metal engineered components.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
58
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Essential Content
LO1 Explore the conventional machining, additive manufacture and forming
processes and their application in the production of engineered
components
Manufacturing processes:
Material removal machining processes including: conventional manual
processes, CNC machining and erosion machining technologies
Selection of machining processes to generate geometrical forms: flat and
cylindrical geometry
Additive manufacture principles, techniques (e.g., 3D printing,), processes and
applications; virtual machining/forming technologies and example case studies
Impact of material removal rate on surface finish and texture and speed of
production
Consideration of the effect of production volume (prototypes, batch, and high
volume) on the selection of the most appropriate process, tooling and resource
commitment
Safe working practices when operating machining and process forming
equipment.
LO2 Explain how component materials, metals and non-metals, affect the
selection of the most appropriate machining or forming process
Material choice and machine process:
Impact of material types on the choice of machining process including: round,
square and hexagonal bar, tube, plate, section and pre-cast
Effective of post processing activities of additive layer manufactured parts,
e.g. hot isostatic pressing and shot peening.
Machining characteristics when using polymers, composites, non-ferrous and
ferrous metals and exotic materials
Composites for machining/forming, latest advancements in composites
How the mechanical properties of the component material can be affected by
the machining process
Effect of lubricants, coolants and cutting fluids on tooling, production speed,
and quality of finish.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
59
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



LO3 Examine the most appropriate machine tooling, jigs and fixtures to support
the production of an engineered component
Awareness of the range of cutting tools:
Factors that prolong tool life, increased material removal rate and improved
surface finish
Properties for cutting tool materials
Cause and effect of premature and catastrophic tool failure, preventative
measures to promote tool life.
Cutting forces and the mechanics of chip formation:
Factors that affect cutting speeds and feeds, calculating cutting speeds and feeds
Relationship between cutting speed and tool life, economics of metal removal
Range of tooling jigs and fixtures including mechanical, magnetic, hydraulic and
pneumatic
Work-holding: six degrees of freedom.
LO4 Discuss the most appropriate moulding and shaping process used to
produce a range of metal and non-metal engineered components
Moulding and shaping processes:
Range of metal and ceramic powder moulding and shaping processes
Casting, powder metallurgy and sintering
Range of plastic moulding and shaping processes: blow, compression, extrusion,
injection, laminating, reaction injection, matrix, rotational, spin casting, transfer
and vacuum forming
Discuss in groups industry case studies and good practices in producing metal
and non-metal engineered components.
Range, benefits and limitations of various shaping processes:
Extrusion, forging, rolling, hot and cold presswork.
Range of casting processes:
Sand, permanent mould, investment, lost foam, die, centrifugal, glass and slip
casting.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
60
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Learning Outcomes and Assessment Criteria
Pass Merit Distinction
LO1 Explore the conventional machining, additive
manufacture and forming processes and their application in
the production of engineered components
P1 Explain the most M1 Analyse the D1 Evaluate the benefits
appropriate machining or characteristics of and limitations of
additive manufacture process conventional machining components manufactured
to manufacture a selected processes, additive using conventional
component manufacture processes, machining, additive
plastic moulding processes manufacture and moulding
P2 Explore the reasons why
and powder metallurgy processes.
a specific moulding process
used in producing
would be used to manufacture
components.
a selected component.
LO2 Explain how component materials, metals and non-
metals, affect the selection of the most appropriate
machining or forming process
P3 Explain how the M2 Detail the D2 Evaluate the structure
manufacturing process can characteristics of cutting and mechanical properties
affect the structure and tool geometries of a given engineered
properties of the parent component manufactured
M3 Examine why different
material using the die-casting
tool geometries are
process and conventional
P4 Describe the effect required for different
material-removal
lubricants, coolants and material types.
machining processes.
cutting fluids have on tooling,
production speed, and quality
of finish.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
61
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Pass Merit Distinction
LO3 Examine the most appropriate machine tooling, jigs and
fixtures to support the production of an engineered
component
P5 Examine the parameters of M4 Analyse the properties D3 Critique the relationship
metal removal that determine and modes of failure of between metal removal
the appropriate tooling for modern cutting tools used rate and tool life on the
the production of a given in machining operations. economics of material
engineered component removal.
P6 Describe the range of
tooling jigs and fixtures
needed to retain a component
during manufacture to
mitigate possible failures
linked to the cutting tools
employed during the process.
LO4 Discuss the most appropriate moulding and shaping
process used to produce a range of metal and non-metal
engineered components.
P7 Explain which material M5 Analyse each of the D4 Evaluate how the
characteristics determine the stages of the moulding composition and structure
choice of moulding processes process and comment on of metal alloys, polymers
the benefits associated with and polymer matrix
P8 Discuss the benefits
this manufacturing process. composites are affected by
and limitations of products
the material machining or
manufactured by sintering
forming process.
and moulding processes.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
62
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Recommended Resources
Note: See HN Global for guidance on additional resources.
Print Resources
Bhattacharyya B. and Doloi B. (2019) Modern machining technology: Advanced, hybrid,
micro machining and super finishing technology . Academic Press.
Chang K.H. (2021) Virtual Machining Using CAMWorks 2021: CAMWorks as a solidworks
Module . 1st Ed. SDC Publications.
Gajrani K.K., Prasad A. and Kumar A. (2022) Advances in Sustainable Machining
and Manufacturing Processes. 1st Ed. CRC Press.
Gibson I., Rosen D., Khorasani M. and Stucker B. (2020) Additive Manufacturing
Technologies: 3D Printing, Rapid Prototyping, and Direct Digital Manufacturing . 3rd Ed.
Cham, Switzerland: Springer Nature.
Groover M.P. (2020) Fundamentals of Modern Manufacturing: Materials, Processes,
And Systems . John Wiley and Sons.
Gupta K. and Davim J.P. (2020) High-Speed Machining. 1st Ed. Academic Press.
Huda Z. (2021) Machining Processes and Machines: Fundamentals, Analysis,
and Calculations . 1st Ed. CRC Press.
Kalpakjian S. and Schmid R.S. (2013) Manufacturing Engineering and Technology .
th
7 Ed. Pearson.
Nayak R.K., Pradhan M.K. and Sahoo A.K. (2022) Machining of Nanocomposites.
1st Ed. CRC Press.
Pramanik A. (2021) Machining and Tribology: Processes, Surfaces, Coolants,
and Modeling. 1st Ed. Elsevier.
Journals
Note: Example journals listed below provide a broad range of articles related to unit content and
those relevant for the qualification. Staff and students are encouraged to explore these journals
and any other suitable journals to support the development of academic study skills, and subject
specific knowledge and skills as part of unit level delivery.
International Journal of Machining and Machinability of Materials
International Journal of Machine Tools and Manufacture
Journal of Materials: Design and Applications ,
Machining Science and Technology
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
63
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025



Links
This unit links to the following related units:
Unit 4009: Materials, Properties and Testing
Unit 4010: Mechanical Workshop Practices.
Unit Descriptors for the Pearson BTEC Higher Nationals Engineering Suite (2024)
64
Issue 6 – October 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025